WAR! Oh! how much of misery is expressed in that one word! It tells its
own tale of woe, of blood, of broken hearts and desolated homes, of
hopes blighted, of poverty and crime, of plunder, peculation and
official tyranny, of murder and sudden death. In short, it develops all
the baser passions of the human heart, changing a peaceful world to a
world of woe, over which the destroying angel well might weep.

Come, oh, thou angel, PEACE!

The “Army of the Mississippi,” as it was termed, had been unsuccessful
in their pursuit of the rebel General Price. A portion of it, or rather
the division commanded by General Sigel, had advanced from Springfield,
Missouri, upon the Wilson creek road, as far as the famous battle-ground
rendered immortal by the death of General Lyon, but finding no enemy, it
had encamped upon Grand Prairie, a few miles to the west of the bloody
field. All in camp was upon the “tip-toe of expectation.” The lovely
scene spread out before the view, was sufficient to inspire the heart of
man to great and glorious deeds. The broad, rolling prairie lay there,
like heaven’s great carpet. The long grass waved in the breeze,
presenting the appearance of a deep-green sea, undulating in low swells
as if Queen Mab’s wand were wafting over it; the autumn’s frost had
changed thousands of the delicate emerald blades to purple, yellow, and
scarlet, while, intermixed with these, was the white prairie flower,
lending to the scene an almost fairy-like aspect. The large “Fremont”
tents were arranged in rows, in a tasty manner; flags were flying; bands
were discoursing sweet strains which echoed far and wide; squads of
soldiers in vari-colored uniforms were lounging lazily on the grass,
while those detailed for mess or guard duty, were busily prosecuting
their assigned tasks. To the east of the camp appeared a wall of
forest-kings, their verdure, also, touched by the frost, presenting a
variety of colors, and glistening in the sunlight.

Few in that small army had witnessed the horrors of the battle-field;
but, like all “green” troops, conceiving that there was much of romance
connected with the deadly field, and that heroes were created by a
single brave deed, the mass of Sigel’s men were eager to meet the foe.
It had been given out that the entire army was to join this division on
the prairies, and that an advance was to be made at once against Price,
who was then at Cassville, some forty miles distant, to the southward.

“I think we can safely count upon a desperate battle by the day after
to-morrow,” exclaimed one of a party of five, seated within a captain’s
tent—four of whom were at a table, with cups and wine before them. The
fifth person was making himself generally useful, acting in the capacity
of a servant.

“You have fleshed your maiden sword at Springfield, and I did not
suppose you would be anxious for another fight. I confess I can not gaze
upon such scenes without a shudder, and, if duty would permit, I would
willingly sheathe my sword forever.”

“Captain Hayward, you are low-spirited to-day,” answered the first
speaker.

“I am, indeed, Lieutenant Wells. And can you wonder? My sister is here!”

“I only wish mine was!”

“That is a rash wish, my friend. She would be exposed to much danger,
and I never want mine to gaze upon a battle-field. No! where _men_ cut
each other’s throats, delicate, sensitive women should not be near!”

“Could you find no way in which to send her from Springfield to St.
Louis?” asked Wells.

“I could have done so by the mail coach but, you know, the entire
distance of one hundred and thirty miles, from Springfield to Rolla, or
to Tipton upon the other route, is infested with guerrillas, and I
feared to send her. I preferred she should brave the dangers of the camp
or even the battle-field with me.”

Captain Hayward bent his head upon his hands and was silent. It was some
moments before any one ventured to speak. All appeared to be oppressed
with a strange sadness. At length one of the party, Captain Gilbert,
slapping him familiarly upon the shoulder, and endeavoring to speak
gayly, said:

“Come, come, Harry, this won’t do! you must shake off every vestige of
blues. You are suffering still from the wound you received in the Warsaw
skirmish, and it makes you low-spirited. No doubt your sister will be
perfectly safe, and I know she had much rather be with you, to assist
you should you need her aid, than to be safe in St. Louis, enduring the
tortures of suspense.”

Hayward made no reply. At this moment, a female, delicate and fair, came
tripping lightly into the tent, her face wreathed in smiles, and her
eyes sparkling with delight; but, as she caught sight of Hayward, she
paused, and gazed upon him for a moment, exhibiting the most intense
interest; then advancing, and placing her hand upon his shoulder, she
spoke:

“Brother!”

Hayward started, and clasping her in his arms, he pressed her close to
his heart for a moment. But, gazing into his eyes, she asked:

“What is the matter, dear Harry, you appear ill?”

The countenance of Hayward underwent an instant change, as he replied:

“Not ill, but somewhat depressed in spirits, perhaps, in view of what a
day may bring forth.”

“Oh! Harry,” she said, “I hear there is going to be another fight. Will
_you_ have to go into it and leave me?”

“Should there be a battle, I shall endeavor to protect you, dear
sister.”

“But, you will be in danger; perhaps wounded—perhaps killed! Oh! what
_would_ I do, then? Don’t go, Harry!” and the gentle girl threw her arms
around her brother’s neck and wept. After a moment, he raised her, and
pressing his lips to her forehead, said:

“I wish to speak with these gentlemen a moment. Go to your friend
Alibamo’s tent. I will come for you, soon!” The sister cast back a look
of fond solicitude, and left the tent.

Hayward gazed after her a moment, muttering audibly:

“Poor child, what _would_ you do if I should fall. You would indeed be
alone!”

“Now, captain, I don’t think that’s half fair,” exclaimed the one spoken
of as being the servant. “Do you think I am such a darn skunk as to—if
you was killed—the darn—not to fight for my capt’n’s sister—the
skunk—no, I mean, if you die—if she—darn me, if I don’t—I—I—” and the
speaker, as if unable to express what he _did_ mean, suddenly left the
tent. All present smiled broadly, and good-humor was thus, for the
moment, infused in all hearts.

“Nettleton had a sudden call!” said one.

“He has gone to the sutler for a dictionary!” added another.

“His heart is in the right place,” remarked Hayward.

“That’s so!” responded all, with emphasis.

“You are safe, with such a ‘darn skunk’ for your body-guard, Captain
Hayward,” Gilbert declared, with comic seriousness.

William Nettleton was in height about six feet. His general appearance
was very singular. His hair was nearly white—naturally so; his eyes of a
light green and large; his carriage very loose—indeed, when he walked,
one would almost expect to see him fall in pieces. His feet were huge in
dimensions. He had the appearance of a half-witted, illy-formed person;
but he was, withal, neither one nor the other. Having been detached from
the company to which he belonged, to act as servant to Captain Hayward,
he soon became so greatly attached and devoted to the captain, as to be
styled his “body-guard.” This attachment was not fictitious, nor did it
proceed from a spirit of military sycophancy or subserviency; it was
felt. Nettleton had evinced more than ordinary courage on several
occasions, and had, also, displayed so much judgment with his
intrepidity, that he had received offers of advancement; but these he
declined, preferring, as he expressed himself, “to stay with my capt’n,
the first what promoted me.”

It will also be well to explain the presence of ladies in the camp. Miss
Mamie Hayward was the sister of Captain Hayward, who, having received
intelligence that her brother was wounded, had visited Springfield for
the purpose of ministering to his wants. At the time of her arrival
Fremont’s “Army of the Mississippi” was marching upon that place, and
the journey from Rolla or Tipton was safe. But soon, those roads were
infested with guerrillas, and, as they were poorly guarded, it was not
thought prudent that the ladies who had reached Springfield should
attempt a return. Miss Hayward, therefore, remained with her brother.
This same reason will apply to all the ladies in camp, of which there
were several—conspicuous among whom was the wife of Adjutant Hinton, one
of the officers of the well-known “Benton Cadets.” She was usually
addressed as “Alibamo”—her name when a captive in Price’s hands. She was
very beautiful, and of that daring, determined nature which has
immortalized so many women of the West. In company with Alibamo, was a
young lady who acted in the capacity of waiting-maid, but who really
appeared more like a companion. This female possessed the not
particularly euphonious name of Sally Long.

“I must join with Nettleton in my reproaches, Captain Hayward,” answered
Lieutenant Wells, in a subdued tone. “You forget my conversation with
you last night!”

“No, Wells. You informed me of your affection for my sister, but you
have never addressed her as a lover. How do you know that she will
return your love? If she could return it, I confess, lieutenant, I do
not know any one to whom I would more willingly see her united; but, if
she can not, how could you assume to become her protector?”

“If such should be the case, and the fortunes of war should deprive her
of a brother, rest assured that, not only myself, but every man in camp
would willingly shed his blood in her defense, and care for her as a
sister!”

“Thank you. I _do_ feel a foreboding of evil. I believe I shall be
killed in the coming battle. If this should be the case, I commend her
to your care. But, my nerves are excited. I will walk into the open air.
No! I would be alone!” he added, as one of the officers arose as if to
accompany him.

As he left the tent one of the party, a Captain Walker, exclaimed:

“Well, I hope things are all right, but I have my doubts!”

“Your doubts of what?” asked Wells.

“Humph! well, no matter. _You_ are too directly interested to listen to
the explanation. But, perhaps you will find out some day.”

“Do you intend, sir, to cast any slur upon Captain Hayward?”

Captain Walker did not reply, but left the tent. An hour or more had
passed, and Hayward did not return. It was now quite dark, when suddenly
the assembly was sounded, and, all anxious, the troops fell in. The
order was read:

“Pack knapsacks, and have every thing in readiness for a move at
daylight.”

All was excitement, and every preparation was made for a forward
movement. But soon it began to be whispered that the orders were to
return. In a short time it was officially announced that the movement
was, in reality, _back to Springfield_, and from thence to Rolla and St.
Louis. Many were the expressions of disappointment and regret, and some
even ventured to denounce the policy. Fremont had been superseded in the
field, and General Hunter, his successor, had abandoned the campaign,
then on the very eve of its final consummation.




                              CHAPTER II.

              _The Tragedy of the Stream. Who was Guilty?_


WHEN Captain Hayward left the tent, he proceeded to the stream which
skirted the woods. Bending over it, he bathed his fevered brow. Then he
seated himself upon the bank of the river, and, resting his head upon
his hands, was, for a long time, absorbed in his thoughts. A human form
flitted lightly past. Hayward raised his head and listened, but all was
quiet again, and, in the darkness of the night he could distinguish
nothing.

“I was mistaken!” he said to himself. “If I was not, and a human being
is around, I will wager it was Nettleton, who, anxious for my safety,
has followed me.”

The captain was again silent for a moment, when the breaking of a twig
betrayed the presence of some person. Hayward raised his head and
called:

“William! William Nettleton!”

“Sir!” answered a voice but a few feet from the captain.

“Why did you follow me, William?”

“Cos I’m a darn skunk,” drawled the person addressed, as he emerged out
of the darkness. “And——_Curse you_!”

The person speaking was before him. In an instant Hayward sprung to his
feet, but, with a cry of agony exclaimed: “Great God, Nettleton—why have
you—oh God, save me—you’ve killed me—I die!” And, falling heavily
forward, the words died upon his tongue.

The murderer bent over the murdered for a moment; then, with some haste,
rolled the body into the water, and turned from the spot. He paused
under the shade of a tree, and listened for the tread of a sentry, that
he might enter the camp unobserved. With a half-suppressed laugh he
uttered his thoughts:

“I have done it, sure; and now that it is done, I must progress—no
retreating now. I think I’ll win. Good-by, captain, and give my respects
to my friends as you float downstream.”

He proceeded with caution toward the camp, and was soon lost in the city
of canvas.

The tattoo soon sounded. Lights were extinguished, and all was quiet,
save in a few tents, which appeared to be those of officers. Yet, there
were aching hearts within that camp, and, as the night progressed, many
were the anxious inquiries as to why Captain Hayward did not return.

In a large tent, near that occupied by Captain Hayward, were seated
three ladies. One was Miss Hayward; another was Alibamo, or, as she is
now a wife, she should be called Mrs. Adjutant Hinton; the other was
Miss Sally Long, the waiting-maid of Alibamo. Before this tent paced a
special guard; beside it was a tent of much smaller dimensions, occupied
by Nettleton and _his_ servant, black George, or, as Nettleton used to
call him, “Swasey’s nigger.”

“I fear something has befallen my brother. He does not return, and it is
now twelve o’clock!”

“Don’t be alarmed,” said Alibamo, in a soothing voice; “your brother is
most likely at the head-quarters of General Sigel. He may be detained on
business. Come, let us retire.”

“No, not while my brother is absent.”

At this moment the guard came to the tent entrance and said:

“Ladies, if you have not yet retired Captain Walker requests the
pleasure of a few words with Miss Hayward.”

“Oh, Alibamo, I fear that man; he looks at me so strangely. But perhaps
he brings news of my brother. I will see him. Bid the captain enter.”

As Walker entered he appeared agitated, but controlling his emotions, he
said:

“Ladies, you will pray excuse me. I feel that I _must_ speak now, as it
may be my last opportunity. We—or, I should say the army—will be
separated at Springfield, and I shall see you no more.”

“Do you bring news of my brother?” asked Miss Hayward.

“No! His disappearance is very strange. But I came to speak of myself.”

“What would you say?”

“This, Miss Hayward. I have loved you long and dearly. To-morrow we may
be parted, and I would ask you, should the fortunes, or rather the
misfortunes, of war deprive you of a brother’s love and protection, will
you not permit me to seek you out and become your future protector?”

“Captain Walker, these words surprise me, and I think propriety demanded
that they should have been spoken in the presence of my brother.”

“Pardon me, dear lady. I have waited until this hour for your brother’s
return, and at last, fearing I should have no other opportunity, I
ventured to visit you now. You have a friend and sister in Alibamo, and
surely you will not fear to speak before her.”

“I can not answer your question—it refers to the future.”

“Then for the _present_. Let me speak plainly, and I beg you will do the
same. Can you not at least regard me _now_ as your friend and protector,
and give me a friend’s privileges?”

The timid girl turned toward Alibamo, and in an inaudible voice, spoke a
word.

“She answers promptly, _no_!” replied Alibamo, somewhat sterner than was
her usual manner.

“You _love_ another, then?” asked Walker.

Miss Hayward did not reply.

“Is the favored one Lieutenant Wells?” again asked Walker.

“You are impertinent, Captain Walker,” replied Alibamo. “I must request
you to retire. How can you thus, in her brother’s absence, address her
in this manner?”

At this moment there was a commotion in the tent of Nettleton. The voice
of the negro was heard, exclaiming:

“I he’rd you, massa Nettleton. There ain’t no use in you denyin’ it. I
he’rd massa cap’n say, ‘Oh, Nettleton, ye kill me!’ Oh Lord, if eber I
get out ob _dis_ scrape, ye’ll neber catch dis chile in such another
one.”

“Is the nigger crazy? What is the darn skunk talking about?”

“Oh, you needn’t make b’lieve ignoramus on dis ’ere question. I he’rd
ye.”

“Now, look a here, you unconscionable dark; if you have got any thing to
say, spit it out. Don’t make a darn skunk of yourself.”

“Oh! won’t I fotch ye up in de morning? Yes, sah!”

“Are you going to speak, and say what you mean?”

“Oh, golly! You go back on de cap’n dat way!”

“What cap’n? Out with it, or I’ll break your head and every bone in your
body,” exclaimed Nettleton, in a state of undisguised excitement.

“Serve dis nigger as ye did de cap’n, and den put his body in de riber!”

The negro had scarcely uttered these words when Nettleton seized him. He
set up a terrible howl, which brought Captain Walker to their tent.

“What is all this fuss about?” asked Walker.

The negro went on to explain as follows:

“Why, ye see, massa cap’n, I went ober to dat yar house across de riber,
to see Miss Julia, a col’d gal dat used to be my sweetheart. Well, I
see’d de Johnnies comin’, and I ran down to de riber to come on dis
side, but dey come so close to me dat dis chile hid behind a big log.
Den dey stop right by me, and say, ‘Golly, we can’t cotch nobody.’ Den I
he’rd some one on de oder side ob de riber say, “Oh, Nettleton, you—”

“Silence this stuff! You have been drunk. If you speak upon this subject
again, I’ll cut your black throat.”

“I’se dumb, massa cap’n.”

Quiet had now been restored, and all parties retired for the few hours
that intervened before morning. But it was evident all were not asleep.
Several times a stealthy step was heard, and a shadow flitted past the
white canvas tent, dimly seen by the pale starlight.

Morning came at last, and all was astir. Captain Hayward had not yet
returned. The inquiry was made if any one had seen him.

“I have not seen him since last evening at twilight,” replied Walker,
“at which time he acted very strangely, and talked about the injustice
of war. I am inclined to think he has deserted and joined the enemy.”

“Oh, you darn skunk!” yelled Nettleton, as he sprang forward, and was
about to strike the speaker. But, checking himself, he added: “It’s well
you wear them gilt things on your shoulders, or I’d teach you to call
_my_ cap’n such names.”

“If you would save yourself trouble you had better remain quiet,
Nettleton,” replied Walker, as he fixed his eyes significantly upon him.

“_I_ knows where Cap’n Hayward am,” said the negro, stepping forward.

“Where is he?” sobbed Miss Hayward, pressing forward, in her eagerness.

“He is—”

“Silence!” yelled Walker.

“Let him speak,” said the colonel. “Go on, George. Where is the
captain?”

“Down dar!” The negro trembled violently, and glanced at Nettleton.

“What do you mean?”

“He’s in de riber—killed dead, sure!”

A wild shriek rose upon the air as Miss Hayward fell back into the arms
of Alibamo, insensible.

“By whom was he killed?”

“By massa Nettleton dar, _sure_. I he’rd across de riber, jis as plain
as day.”

Nettleton started back in horror, his eyes extending widely, and his
frame trembling. A general murmur of disbelief ran through the crowd.

“Did you _see_ him do the deed?” asked the colonel.

“Golly, I couldn’t see much, it war so dark. But I hear massa cap’n say,
‘Oh, Nettleton, you kill me!’ Golly, see how massa Nettleton shake!”

“Where was this?”

“Rite down by dat tree. His blood is all ober de ground; I jest see it.”

In an instant Nettleton had dashed off for the spot indicated. In
accordance with an order from the colonel he was pursued. Reaching the
locality named, he gazed upon the ground. It was red with blood—fresh
blood. He threw himself upon the earth, and wept and moaned, and called
upon his captain to return. His grief was terrible to behold. By this
time the officers and many of the men had arrived. They gazed upon the
grief-stricken servant with respect, and more than one expression of
sympathy was heard.

“If Captain Hayward has been murdered, it was not by that boy. Nettleton
loved his captain too much to harm him,” said Lieutenant Wells. “I am
inclined to think the deed has been done by skulking guerrillas.”

“I incline to your opinion, Lieutenant Wells, as to the innocence of
Nettleton. But, as to the deed having been done by guerrillas, it is not
likely. It is much too near camp.”

“But Hayward certainly had no enemy in our camp who would have done this
deed.”

“We do not know the secret motives which animate the human heart,”
replied Walker, in a tone and manner not devoid of meaning.

“Let instant search be made for the body,” commanded the colonel. It was
done, but no trace of it could be found, although the water was too
shallow to have permitted it to float down the river. Attention was
again directed to Nettleton, who was sitting erect, gazing at a piece of
sharp, bloody steel which he held in his hand. Viewing it a moment, he
sprung to his feet, and fixed his eyes upon Lieutenant Wells. Then he
turned to the colonel and handed him the blade. That officer examined
it. Directing his gaze upon Lieutenant Wells, he asked:

“Has any one among you a small Spanish dirk, with a highly-polished and
ornamented blade?”

“I _had_ such a one,” replied Wells, “but I have missed it for several
days.”

The colonel instantly turned toward the camp, commanding all to follow
him. He halted before the tent of Lieutenant Wells, and said:

“You, Captain Walker, and you, Adjutant Hinton, enter this tent, and
tell me what you find.”

The search lasted but a moment, during which time Wells had been
assisting Miss Hayward, but not without evincing much agitation. Walker
now appeared, holding in his hand a bowl of bloody water, and exhibiting
the broken stiletto, covered with blood, which had been found in the
overcoat pocket of Wells. A shirt, also, was found, which was stained
with blood.

“What can you say to this damning proof of your guilt?” asked the
colonel.

“I know nothing of it.”

“Arrest the murderer of Captain Harry Hayward!” commanded the colonel,
in a loud voice.

The guards instantly seized him.

“Murderer! _He_ a murderer—and of my brother! No! no! This is some
dreadful dream. Oh, tell me my brother is not murdered; it will kill me.
Oh, see! Pity a friendless girl who kneels to you and begs you to tell
her that you have _not_ deprived her of a dear brother. Speak to me,
Edward. I did love you, and you would not harm him.”

Wells could not speak. He had never spoken to Miss Hayward of his love
for her; but _now_, in the delirium of her grief, she had confessed her
love for him. Oh, what a moment!

Walker advanced to raise Miss Hayward from her bended position before
Wells.

“Paws off, ye darn skunk!” yelled Nettleton, as he hurled Walker to the
ground. “_I_ alone am her protector now.”




                              CHAPTER III.

               _The Proposal—The Interruption—The Indian
               —The Rescue—The Wounded Man—The Mystery._


NEAR the village of Ozark, at the base of a ridge of mountains of that
name, runs a most beautiful stream or river, which bears the name of the
village, and is one of the tributaries of the north fork of the
Gasconade. Its banks are high, and covered with a thick but small growth
of the “scrub” oak, peculiar to that portion of Missouri. The bed of the
river sparkles with brilliant white and yellow pebbles, polished by the
rush of waters for thousands of years. A fine bridge spans the stream
along the main road, that runs through the only opening in the forest
for miles around. After crossing this bridge, and ascending a sharp
hill, the village of Ozark is reached. This consists of about twenty
ordinary-looking dwellings, a court-house, and a rough building,
dignified by the name hotel. Beyond the village, and higher up the
mountain, is a line of rolling hills, which overlook the country for
miles around. On one of these, and near the edge of a grove, were to be
seen a cluster of tents, and, from the number of horses picketed but a
short distance away, it would at once be supposed, from a distance, to
be a cavalry camp, with, perhaps, a section of artillery.

On a sloping point, extending from the side of the bridge to the stream,
and reclining upon the turf, were two persons. The one a young man of
marked appearance, and the other a female of much beauty, although her
dress bespoke her a native of that portion of the country.

“Nettie, when do you expect your sister to return?”

“It is difficult to answer, Charles, but I trust very soon.”

“Have you not heard from her recently?”

“No. There is no way in which she can communicate with me. The mails
have been discontinued, you are aware, from Rolla to Springfield.”

“If you can _visit_ the army, I presume you can both dispatch and
receive letters. Are you not very anxious to learn how she is treated
among the Federals?”

“I am most anxious; still I have no fears.”

“I can not feel as you do upon that subject. I would not awaken useless
fears in your breast, but _I_ have not so much confidence in their
magnanimous natures.”

“Charles, you told me to-day for the first time, that you loved me, and
asked me if I could not address you as _dear_ Charles. You have been
very kind to me, and, on one occasion, you rescued me from the hands of
a villain. I feel grateful—truly so. But, whatever my feelings may be, I
never can wed my country’s enemy. Look yonder. You see that white
cottage. Once it was beautifully adorned with creeping vines, and the
lawn before it bloomed with flowers and shrubbery. But, dearer than all,
within its walls lived my father and my sister. Look at it now! Its
beauty has departed—it is a _wreck_; father and sister have been driven
from it, while I have been detained here by _force_. You profess to love
me. If you do so, _prove it_! We are now more than a mile from the rebel
camp, and you can escape with me to Springfield.”

“I will assist _you_ to escape; indeed, I will accompany you a portion
of the way to Springfield. But _I_ must return to my own people and
fight with them to the last. I _do_ love you, and I _would_ become your
husband, gladly, if I could be satisfied you loved me for myself alone.
But, I can not sacrifice one jot of honor or principle to win even you,
dear Nettie.”

“And you will go with me, now?”

“Yes—stay, what is that? Did you not hear a low, moaning sound?”

“I heard nothing.”

“Well, perhaps I am mistaken. But I fancied I heard such a sound. No
matter. I will go with you now to Springfield.”

“To what purpose, young man?”

The speaker was a powerful person, and had emerged from the bridge just
in time to hear the last sentence of Charles Campbell.

“So, sir,” he continued, “you would desert us, and join the Yankees, and
all for your foolish regard for this vixen!”

“Colonel Price, if you were not an officer I would make you _eat_ your
words. I have served you faithfully, and you have no right to question
my loyalty. I do _not_ intend to desert, neither is this lady a _vixen_
any more than you are a _coward_.”

Price started, bit his lips, and frowned fiercely. At length he asked:

“Why did you propose visiting Springfield with this——lady?”

“I intended to accompany her a portion of the way, and then to return to
my duty.”

“Why does _she_ wish to visit Springfield?”

“Because her father and sister are both in St. Louis, and she wishes to
rejoin them.”

“Did not yonder cottage belong to her father?”

“It did.”

“He was one of the most bitter opposers in this section. And you love
his abolition daughter?”

“I love his _daughter_, sir!”

“Enough. You will return to camp this moment. I will take charge of this
young lady. When I rejoin you, I shall put your loyalty and your
_courage_ to the test. Do you see yonder boat?”

He pointed up the river. A small boat was seen floating down the stream,
in which three men were sitting erect, and the form of a fourth, lying
prostrate.

“How do you propose testing my loyalty, Colonel Price?”

“That boat contains a Yankee officer. He is to be hung up by the neck.
You shall perform the job.”

“Is not that man _wounded_, Colonel Price?”

“Yes, very badly so, I am informed.”

“_Then I will not perform the base thing you propose._”

Price drew a revolver, and pointing it to the head of Campbell,
commanded him to start at once for camp. He had scarcely done so, when a
powerful Indian sprung from concealment, and snatched the weapon from
his hand. At the same time he seized Price, as if he had been a child,
and hurled him into the water below. Without waiting to watch the result
of this sudden immersion upon the chivalrous colonel, he caught the
maiden in his arms, and bounded off in the direction of Springfield. As
he started, he beckoned to the young man and muttered:

“Come—follow—me save her!”

Price floundered about in the water for a moment, and finally succeeded
in reaching the shore just as the boat came up.

“Come—quick—join me in the pursuit!” yelled Price.

The three men leaped upon the bank, and, at the command of Price, all
discharged their pieces after the retreating Indian, but without effect.
Pursuit was then ordered, but Price, observing that Campbell did not
follow, turned and asked:

“Are _you_ not coming, sir?”

“No!” was the prompt reply.

Price felt for his revolver, but finding it gone, he only muttered,
“Curse you,” and then commenced the pursuit. For over a mile it was kept
up. The pursuers gained upon the Indian, who was considerably obstructed
in his flight by the weight of the female. At last Price exclaimed:

“By the eternal, there come the Yankees!”

Sure enough, just appearing in view upon an elevated point a little
beyond, was seen a squadron of cavalry, and a section of flying
artillery rapidly advancing.

“To the hill! Give the signal for our guns—to the bridge—secure the
prisoner in the boat!”

These commands were given by Price, as he commenced a rapid retreat
toward the bridge. Pausing on the hill just before reaching it, he
unfurled a small flag and made a signal. In an instant all was astir in
the rebel camp, and artillery and cavalry soon came dashing down the
hill.

“Where is the prisoner?” yelled Price, as he came to the bridge.

“Perhaps the young man you left here has taken him to camp.”

“But the boat is gone! However, there is no time to be lost, now. They
are upon us! Quick!”

Colonel Price started for the opposite end of the bridge, followed by
his three confederates. The rebel troops were still some distance from
that end of the bridge nearest their camp, which it was evident they
intended reaching, if possible, in order to sweep the narrow passage, if
the Union forces attempted to cross. The Federals, however, were the
first to gain that point. But, had a crossing been effected, as soon as
they reached the opposite side they would have been exposed to the most
galling fire of the enemy, as there was a large space of flat, swampy
ground in front; and then a sharp bluff, upon which the rebel artillery
would, in such a case, be planted. The commander of the Federals,
observing this situation at a glance, ordered a halt, and brought his
section of artillery into position. One piece was placed so as to
enfilade the bridge, and the other upon a little rise of ground, in a
position where it could sweep their lines beyond. The rebels observing
this, threw forward two guns, amid a deadly fire from the Unionists, and
succeeded in taking a position upon the opposite end of the bridge.
Several rounds of grape were hurled back and forth, but as the cover was
good, but little damage was done. The cavalry attempted a crossing, but
the thick growth of oaks prevented. A charge was about to be ordered
across the bridge, when an explosion took place, and it was shattered to
fragments. Taking advantage of this, the rebels made a rapid flight. As
pursuit was useless, the command was given to fall back to Springfield.

The Indian we have spoken of now approached the commander, leading the
trembling woman, and said:

“Me save—you save—white squaw!”

“Do you require my protection?” asked the commander.

Nettie told her story in an artless manner, of which the reader has
gleaned all necessary particulars. She was kindly provided for, and soon
reached Springfield in perfect safety.

Soon after the arrival, a soldier came to the tent of the commanding
officer, presenting a bit of paper.

“Colonel, I picked up this scrap near the bridge, but did not look at it
until this moment. It may be of importance.”

The colonel took the paper and read aloud:

“A suspicion of my fidelity to the Confederate cause has crossed the
mind of my commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel A. M. Price, simply
because I consented to assist Miss Nettie Morton to reach Springfield,
from which point she might be able to rejoin her friends, who formerly
resided in Ozark, but are now in St. Louis. I was condemned, in
consequence, to be the executioner of a _wounded_ Federal officer. At
this cowardly act my whole nature revolted. Chance has favored me, and I
have determined to save him. In what manner I can not here write,
fearing this paper should fall into Confederate hands, and my plans be
thus interrupted. I can not learn who he is. I asked his name, and I
have some reason to believe that Miss Morton may throw some light upon
the subject, as the only words he spoke were ‘Net—murdered—sister—.’ He
bore the rank of captain.

                                                      CHARLES CAMPBELL.”


The colonel turned toward Miss Morton, who was seated in his tent, and
asked:

“Do you feel any _especial_ interest in any Union officer now with us?”

Miss Morton hung her head and blushed.

“Do not fear to speak, and frankly, too, Miss Morton. Perhaps the
welfare of one you love—perhaps his safety, may depend upon your candid
confession.”

“I—I—”

“Have you ever _met_ one of our officers?”

“But once. And then I only passed the evening in his society. He was
kind, but he has forgotten me!”

“It is enough, you love him. But the short time he was with you could
scarcely have made an impression so deep that he would mutter your name
in his delirium. And yet, the wounded man was near your residence. And
he exclaimed ‘Net—’. Your name is Nettie, is it not?”

“It is.”

“And what is the name of him you refer to?”

“Captain HARRY HAYWARD!”

The officer was visibly affected. “‘Nettie.’ ‘Net—.’ ‘Nettleton!’
‘_Murdered._’ ‘Sister.’ It is very strange. Harry Hayward’s body was not
found, but he was assassinated. Ah, I begin to fathom the mystery.” He
murmured all this in words not audible to the astonished Miss Morton,
and left the tent slowly, as if oppressed with the weight of a momentous
thought.




                              CHAPTER IV.

     _Nettleton’s Adventure in a Noose—Some Important Information._


THE surprise of Walker was very great at the unexpected movement of
Nettleton. His sword flashed from its scabbard, and he made a half-pass
at his breast. But, checking himself, he said:

“William, I can forgive you in consideration of your grief, and I spare
you, that you may assist in the care of Miss Hayward. Curse him!” he
muttered to himself, “I would strike the infernal dog dead at my feet,
but the act would only place a greater barrier between me and my prize.
Miss Hayward,” he added aloud, “you will always find me ready and most
anxious to serve you.”

“Miss Hayward will not lack for friends, sir!” replied Alibamo, in a
tone of contempt.

“Captain Walker, I shall place the prisoner in your charge. You will
forward at once.” These words were spoken by the colonel.

Walker bit his lip, and was silent. He then commanded the guard to
forward, muttering as he did so:

“The second most agreeable job. I’ll revenge myself upon him.”

As the guard formed around Lieutenant Wells, he turned to Miss Hayward,
and said:

“Oh! dear lady, you have inadvertently confessed that you had some
regard for me. This is not a time to speak of such things, but I will
now say to you, that which has never before passed my lips, excepting to
your brother. I love you, with a devotion, ardent as it is pure and
holy; and by that love I swear, and beg you to believe, that I have
never harmed your brother!”

Miss Hayward turned toward him, and made a movement as if to reach his
side, but Walker held aloft the bloody knife, which met her gaze, and,
with a shudder, she turned to Alibamo.

“Forward!” cried Walker, and Edward Wells, the once popular officer and
general favorite, was urged on, bound and guarded, charged with, and
generally believed guilty of, the foulest of crimes. But yesterday he
was on the road to honor and fame; now he was marching forward to a
disgraceful death. The entire division was soon in motion.

Nettleton now approached Miss Hayward, and said:

“Miss Mamie, I am going to do all for you such a darn sk— I mean such a
chap as me _can_ do; but, I’m feard that ain’t much. But you’re going
now where there ain’t no danger, and if you please, I’m a going to stay
behind and hunt for the captain.”

“Oh! thank you, William,” sobbed Miss Hayward. “How can I ever repay
you, dear friend?”

“Don’t—don’t!” said William. A choking sensation came over him, and,
unable to say more, he turned away, only to be comforted by Miss Sally
Long, who placed her hands upon his shoulders, and said:

“William, if you will find the captain, I’ll _love you dearly_!”

Nettleton started back, opened his eyes wide—so he did his mouth, as if
attempting to speak. His lower jaw wagged two or three times, but no
sound was heard. Then turning his eyes, he saw the gaze of all fixed
upon him, and started off suddenly upon a run, exclaiming as he did so:

“Who ever thought it possible that _I_ should ever be loved by
Sally—such a darn skunk—a sweet gal, I mean!”

Nettleton did not pause until he had overtaken the colonel, of whom he
requested permission to remain and make a more thorough search for his
captain.

“No, William,” was the reply. “We will not be a mile distant before the
enemy’s scouts will be here, and you will be taken prisoner.”

“No fear, they don’t notice such as me!”

“But your uniform will be sufficient.”

“Oh! I always go prepared. I have another suit _under_ this, one as I
got from the bushwhack I laid out the other night, as he came noseing
around Captain Hayward’s tramping ground, and I shall put that on top.”

“Well, do as you like, but be careful!”

Nettleton waited for no other words, but turning, proceeded at once to
the spot where Hayward received the fatal stab. He sat down for a time,
silent and mournful, gazing into the water. He then commenced a
scrutinizing search. He became satisfied that the body could not have
floated down the river, on account of the shallowness of the water. He
crossed the stream, searched upon the opposite bank, and there found the
footprints of a number of men. He followed the tracks, and found that
_two_ persons had descended _into_ the river, and out again, near the
same spot. He took the measurement of each impression in the mud, and
then exclaimed:

“I’ll be darned if Lieutenant Wells’ boot made any of _them_ marks! I
know how it is. Captain must have come here last night to think, and
some of them darn rebel skunks come up behind him suddenly, and killed
him, and then two of them crossed over and got his body, and brought it
back, and that accounts for the tracks in and out of the water. But what
did they want with him if he was dead? Perhaps he wasn’t quite killed,
and they took him prisoner. I’ll follow these tracks, anyway.”

Nettleton followed up the footmarks until they merged into the turnpike,
which was so cut up with travel as to prevent him tracing them further.
He now returned to the fatal spot. Bending down he examined the earth,
still red with blood. Something appeared to interest him, and creeping
on his knees, he followed a footprint to the edge of the stream. Here
was an impression of _two_ boots, side by side, in the mud. Nettleton
gazed upon them for a few moments. His breast heaved violently—he
clenched his hands, and at last said:

“I’ve blacked _them_ boots. I know ’em well—there is the impression of
the _two hearts_ in the mud, and there ain’t but one pair of boots in
our camp as has _two hearts_ made with nails in the ball of each boot.
Oh, you darn—”

Something caught the eye of Nettleton in the water. He sprung in and
secured it. It proved to be a handkerchief, which bore a name upon the
corner. He gazed upon it a moment, and said:

“The man as had on _them_ boots stood in _them_ tracks, and washed
himself in that river. He wiped upon this hankercher and then threw it
into the water. Folks as washes the evidence of murder off their hands,
don’t wash in the river, throw away the wiper, and then take a tin pot
of bloody water to—”

“What the devil are you doing here?”

Nettleton turned to behold a party of six horsemen who had suddenly
approached him. In his anxiety he had forgotten to change his
clothing—that is, to cover his blue uniform with the rough gray suit he
wore underneath.

“So, you are a Yankee soldier,” exclaimed one of the party.

“No I ain’t; I’m a darn skunk.”

This reply, and the ungainly appearance of Nettleton, caused a laugh
throughout the entire party.

“You are not a Yankee soldier? Then what are you doing with that
uniform?”

Nettleton looked at his dress, and for the first time became conscious
that he had not changed it. He, however, instantly replied:

“I am a spy for the General.”

“What General?”

“General Price, to be sure.”

This created another fit of merriment.

“Just as if the likes of you would be employed as a spy! Why, you don’t
know enough to last you half a mile.”

“That’s just the reason why I _am_ a spy. I am such a darn skunk no one
pays any attention to me.”

“Have you been in the Yankee camp here?”

“Yes.”

“Have you a Confederate uniform under that blue?”

“Yes,” replied Nettleton, throwing off his coat and exposing the gray.

“To what company and regiment do you belong?”

“No company. I go it on my own hook.”

“You know General Price?”

“Yes, very well.”

“Have you ever been in his camp?”

“Often.”

“Describe him.”

Nettleton had, on one occasion, accompanied a party of disguised Union
officers into the very camp of Price, while that General held possession
of the upper Osage. One of the officers being detected and wounded, was
borne along with the retreating rebel army from the Osage to
Springfield, and Nettleton had followed on for the purpose of rendering
assistance if possible. His apparent stupidity prevented suspicion, and
he had been one of the leading spirits in a rescue which afterward
occurred. He was, in consequence, not only known to General Price
himself, but to a large number of his officers and men, and hence it was
very desirable for him to avoid the main army. He supposed that he could
deceive his captors, or effect his escape. And the shadowy thought that
Captain Hayward might have been seized and borne toward the rebel
quarters at once decided his course. He gave an accurate description of
Price.

“Good!” answered one of the party, “it is evident you _are_ a spy. I
find you on the spot the Yankees have just left. You have _their_
uniform on and _ours_ under it. So far that _looks_ well. You know and
have perfectly described our General. That renders it certain you have
seen him. Now, one of two things is certain: you are a _Yankee_ spy, and
have been in our camps with that gray uniform _outside_, and then
communicated your information to _your_ General, or you are a
_Confederate_ spy, who, having just been in the Yankee camp, must have
important information for _our_ General. In either case we shall conduct
you to him. If you are his man, then all will be right. If you are
_not_, then you will be hung within half an hour after your arrival. You
understand?”

“I first thought of going on to Springfield, but I think I have all the
information necessary, and I had made up my mind to return. I halted
here a moment to change my dress; and to look for a Yankee officer who
was supposed to be killed last night. But I think he was only badly
wounded, and may yet be found alive in the tall grass. Look for him.”
These words were spoken by Nettleton in an apparently cheerful tone.

“Oh! you mean the captain who was stabbed last night.”

“Yes, yes; do you know any thing of him?”

“You appear especially anxious, Mr. What’s-your-name?”

“I am anxious,” replied Nettleton, fiercely. “He insulted me, and I
would be revenged.”

“Don’t trouble yourself. He’ll catch it soon enough. He was _not_
killed, but was taken out of the water by us.”

“Who struck the blow?” yelled Nettleton.

“No one of our party. We were concealed upon the opposite bank. We could
not see the murderer strike, for it was too dark; but we saw the body
thrown in the stream, and saw the stabber wash himself in the river. We
would have fired upon him, but were afraid of rousing the Yanks. We
waited until he left the body, after throwing it into the stream, and
then we recovered it. The man was still alive. He had only fainted from
loss of blood. We dressed his wound as well as we could, and then
conveyed him to a house the other side of the pike. He will recover; but
Colonel Price has an especial spite against him. He met him once at
Springfield. So, _when_ he recovers he will be hung.”

“Where is he now?” asked Nettleton.

“At a little house not fifty rods from here, just the other side of the
pike.”

Without a word, Nettleton bounded like a deer in the direction the
Federal forces had taken. But a dozen shots were fired after him, and he
fell. He was soon secured, when it was ascertained that one bullet had
cut the neck badly, and another had struck the ankle, although it had
not broken the bone. He was still able to walk, and, after being bound,
he was dragged forward toward Cassville.

A march of forty miles was almost too much even for the tough Nettleton,
more especially as he had received a severe shot in the ankle; but he
bore up firmly, and at last arrived at the outskirts of the rebel camp.
He had become very lame, and rolled about like a ship in a heavy sea. As
he entered the camp, many were the jeers and taunts which hailed this
specimen of the Yankee soldier. Nettleton made no reply, although his
countenance bespoke his contempt.

He was now near the quarters of Price.

“By thunder!” yelled one of the Confederate soldiers, “that is the very
fellow who fooled us at Springfield. Hang him! Hang him!”

An explanation was soon made, and Nettleton’s fate appeared certain, as
a “drumhead” court-martial had already been convened. Sentence was soon
given—the Yankee spy was to be hung upon the spot!

A rough scaffolding was formed, under a large tree, and a rope, with the
fatal noose attached, thrown over a limb. Nettleton ascended the
platform in silence, although his frame trembled.

“I never saw a Yankee yet that did not fear to die,” exclaimed one of
the bystanders.

“Then you see one now, you darn skunk,” replied Nettleton.

“Why do you tremble, then?” asked the Confederate.

“I was thinking of the captain, and of his poor sister ‘Mamie.’”

“Ha! ha! ha! This booby is in love. A romantic spy. And the idol of his
passion is called ‘Mamie!’”

“You lie, you dog!” yelled Nettleton. “I only—”

“What is all this?” asked a stately-looking officer, who had just
approached, and before whom all the rest fell back.

“A spy, General,” was the response.

“Why was he not brought to _my_ quarters?”

“Because Raines ordered a drumhead court-martial.”

“Release the man until I have conversed with him.”

Nettleton was released, and, as he descended from the scaffolding, he
was recognized by General Price.

“We have met before?” asked Price.

“Yes, General, we have,” was the prompt reply of Nettleton.

“What were you doing in my camp the _first_ time we met?”

“Serving my captain, whom I love.”

“Good! What are you doing here now?”

“That will require considerable explanation,” added Nettleton.

“Go on,” said Price.

“Well, General, some darn skunk _murdered_ my captain, and when our
troops left Grand Prairie, on their return to Springfield, I remained
behind to search for his body. I am _no_ spy.”

“But you said you were a spy, serving General Price,” replied one of the
soldiers who had brought Nettleton to the rebel camp.

“How can you explain this?” asked Price.

“Well, ye see, General, Miss Sally—no, I mean Miss Mamie—that’s the
captain’s sister—will break her poor heart and die of grief if she can’t
learn something about her brother. Them darn skunks as arrested me told
me that Captain Hayward was _not_ killed. Besides this, as nice a darn
sk— I mean as good a man as ever lived, and one who loves Miss
Sally—no—that Miss Sally keeps running in my head—one as loves Miss
Mamie, is accused of murdering the captain. But I know better, for I
found proof enough to convict the right one. I wanted to tell Mamie that
Sally—darn Sally—that her brother was _not_ dead, and to clear
Lieutenant Wells and convict the one as did the deed. So I told them
sneaks as how I _was_ a spy, in hopes they’d let me alone.”

“Would you give any information you may have gleaned here, if I should
set you free?”

“I ain’t no such darn skunk, General. Honor is honor bright with me.”

“What have you seen here?”

“A lot of the darndest sapheads I ever met.”

“If I should set you free, will you fight against me?”

“Like the devil, the first time we meet in fair play.”

“Why do you wear that gray suit under your uniform?”

“Because captain’s always getting himself into some scrape, and I have
to hunt him up. Sometimes I have to go among the Johnnies to do it, and
then the blue ain’t healthy.”

“Will you ever act as spy upon me if I let you go?”

“Not unless capt’n does. But I’m his body-guard, and shall go everywhere
he does, if I can.”

“What is your name?”

“William Nettleton.”

“Well, William, I think we shall be obliged to hang you.”

“All right, General,” answered Nettleton, stepping upon the scaffolding
again. “And them darn sneaks shan’t say they never see’d a Yankee die
bravely. But, General, let me ask of you one favor. You don’t want to
see a good fellow shot for what he didn’t do, and a murderer go clear,
do you?”

“Certainly not.”

“Then all I ask is, that you send this handkerchief to Colonel Mann, and
tell him the murderer didn’t wash in a basin in his tent, but in the
river, and then threw this wiper away; and that the guilty one has _two
hearts_, made with nails, on the sole of each boot. And tell Sally—no,
Mamie—that the captain is—Lieutenant Wells—and Walker—the skunk, when
I’m dead—that Sally—no, capt’n, won’t think of poor Nettleton—and—”

“Oh stop! stop! William, I can never recollect all this. You had better
go yourself and attend to this matter.”

“What, General? Do you mean it?” cried William, as he sprung from the
scaffold and gazed earnestly at Price.

“On one condition I will permit you to go.”

“Well, what is it?”

“That as soon as you have given your evidence in the court-martial which
will probably be ordered, you will return at once _and be hung_.”

“I’ll do it; I’m a loafer if I don’t.”

“You swear it?”

“Yes, by the great jumping jingo, and Sally Long’s tearful eyes!”

“The guard will see this man safely beyond our lines,” said Price,
speaking to one of his officers, “and furnish him a pass and a horse.
Let one of our men accompany him near to the Federal lines, and bring
back the animal which William will ride.”

Nettleton rushed forward, and grasping the hand of Price, shook it
violently, and then exclaimed, as he took his leave:

“General Price, you ain’t such a darn sneak as I thought you was!”




                               CHAPTER V.

                  _The Court-martial and the Hostage._


THE division which had been encamped on Grand Prairie reached
Springfield in safety, and formed their temporary camp in the field,
back of the brick school-house, which stands about a quarter of a mile
to the west of the new court-house.

The first order issued to the officers of the battalion of Benton
Cadets, the Thirty-fifth and Thirty-seventh Illinois, was to assemble at
a given time, to act upon a court-martial, at the quarters of Major D—,
Judge-Advocate, to try the case of Lieutenant Edward Wells, charged with
willful murder of Harry Hayward, a captain in the service of the United
States of America, and attached to the army of the Mississippi, now
under command of Major-General Hunter.

It was a sad day! Lieutenant Wells was a favorite with both officers and
men of his command. He always had been mild as a female, kind and
benevolent—sacrificing his own comfort for the good of the privates in
his battalion. True, some said that Wells would not fight bravely—that
he ought to have been created a _woman_; but everybody gave him credit
for being the kindest of the kind. When first accused, there arose a
very bitter feeling against him. Captain Hayward also was a great
favorite with the men. He was a stern but kind soldier. When the news of
his brutal murder came to the knowledge of his “boys,” their first cry
was “revenge,” and they naturally sought some one on whom to wreak their
vengeance. At first Lieutenant Wells narrowly escaped a summary fate,
more especially as it was whispered about camp that Wells had become a
suitor for the hand of the fair Mamie Hayward, had been _rejected_ by
her, and spurned by the captain. But in a short time it was given out
that Mamie had confessed her affection for Wells, and that Captain
Hayward had remarked in the presence of others, that he deemed Wells an
honorable man, and would gladly favor his suit. This turned the tide of
feeling in favor of the lieutenant, and when the court-martial was
convened, nothing but a consciousness of a soldier’s duty prevented an
open revolt, or at least a most decided and forcible expression of
feeling. But, trusting to the judgment of the officers forming the
court, the soldiers decided to await the result.

Have our readers ever witnessed a trial by court-martial? It is not like
the ordinary court of justice. First, the charge is read, as thus:

“Lieutenant Edward Wells, of Company H, Battalion of B—— C——, is charged
with the willful murder of Harry Hayward, a captain in the U. S. army.

“2d.—Specification.—1st. In this, that said Lieutenant Edward Wells,
did, on the night of the seventh day of November, 1861, assassinate and
murder said,” etc.

Following this, in any case of the kind, would be found a list of
“specifications,” setting forth in detail, all the chief events
connected with the crime.

The prisoner was brought to the tent of Major D—— to answer to the
charge. He was very pale, yet perfectly composed; and when the question
was asked, the ready and firm response was:

“NOT GUILTY!”

The Judge-Advocate, a noble-hearted but just man, informed the prisoner
that he was to act, not only as “prosecuting counsel,” but as “counsel”
for the prisoner, and that he (the Judge-Advocate) must give the
prisoner the benefit of any doubt that might arise in his favor.

To those of our readers not familiar with the _modus operandi_ of a
court-martial, we would give the following information for their
benefit:

The doors of the court are closed to all outsiders. The prisoner makes
his plea, and retires. The witnesses are brought forward and examined,
but no cross-examination is allowed. If a question is to be asked by any
of the officers sitting upon the court, it must be reduced to writing,
and silently handed to the Judge-Advocate. If he sees fit to put the
question, it is done; if not, it is thrown aside.

We will now proceed to a brief summary of the trial.

“Lieutenant Edward Wells, you are charged with the willful murder of
Harry Hayward, a captain in the United States service. What is your
plea. Guilty, or _not_ guilty!”

“Not guilty!” was the decided response.

“Let the first witness be called, George Swasey, colored.”

The person familiarly known as “Swasey’s nigger” took the stand. When
brought forward, he glanced around as if fearful of something, and then
asked:

“Is Massa William Nettletum where he can hear dis chile tell de truff?”

“You have nothing to fear from _any_ person, if you _do_ speak the
truth, and _all_ the truth,” replied Major D.

“Well den, de fact am dis. I went to see my gal. When I cum back, I met
de rebs. I hid behind a log. I see’d some one stick a knife in massa
cap’n, and I heard him say:

“‘Oh! Nettletum, you kill me!’”

All questions were answered in the same spirit, and it became evident
that the negro believed Nettleton the real murderer.

The next witness brought upon the stand was Alibamo Hinton. She swore
that Nettleton’s tent was next to the one she occupied—that he was in
attendance upon her and Miss Hayward, by permission of Captain Hayward,
and that Nettleton had _not_ been out of her presence that night. In the
first part of the evening, Nettleton had remained near her door; in the
latter part, he had missed his captain, and had prostrated himself on a
rug near the tent entrance. She had seen him there _all night_, as she
had not slept at all.

Miss Hayward was too much overcome to appear as a witness, and was
excused.

The next witness was Captain Hugh Walker.

The feeling of the soldiers, to learn the result of the trial, was
intense, and by the time Captain Walker was called to the stand, some
twenty or thirty had crept to the edge of the tent, and endeavored to
conceal themselves in the tall grass outside, to catch the proceedings.
But they were discovered by Walker, who demanded that they should be
removed. This was done, and a guard placed outside.

Captain Walker’s oath was as follows:

“On the night of the seventh of November, I followed Captain Hayward
from his tent. It was at the time gradually becoming dark. My motive in
doing so I will explain. As soon as it began to be rumored that we were
to meet Price, I observed a change in the conduct of Captain Hayward. He
had ever been the center of attraction. His tent was the ‘head-quarters’
of ‘our circle,’ drawn thither by the natural gayety of the captain, and
the presence there of ladies. But this feeling appeared to forsake him,
and on more than one occasion he denounced the war as inhuman. Pardon
me; I would not speak against the dead, but I doubted the loyalty of the
man, and _not_ his courage, and this it was which induced me to follow
him.

“I halted beneath a large tree, which stood near the spot where the
murder evidently was committed. I saw the captain seat himself upon the
bank. At this time it was quite dark, but I saw a shadow approaching. It
passed near me, but I failed to discover who it was. I first thought it
might be William Nettleton following his master. I listened attentively,
however, as the extreme caution of the intruder attracted my attention.
In an instant I heard a groan, a heavy fall, and a voice exclaim: ‘Oh,
William, where are you? Nettleton, I am murdered. WELLS _is the
assassin_!’”

A shudder ran through the court. Major D—— dropped his head upon his
hand and was silent. The officers whispered together. At last, a written
question was handed to the Judge-Advocate, which was promptly asked:

“Captain Walker, why did you not give the alarm, or arrest the murderer
yourself?”

“Sir,” was the prompt reply, “the sequel will show. It was dark; I could
not distinguish the features of any person two yards distant. I feared
he might escape if he should discover me. I therefore followed the
murderer cautiously, and he entered the tent of Lieutenant Wells. He did
not strike a light, but I listened, and heard him washing himself. I
kept close watch upon him until morning, to make sure I was not accusing
an innocent man. No one entered or left the tent. The one who washed his
hands, and left the bloody water, was Lieutenant Edward Wells.”

This evidence was conclusive. But no reason could be assigned for the
murder, unless it was that Miss Hayward had been heard to say that she
never should marry and leave her brother so long as he lived, and it had
now become well known that Wells was a suitor for her hand. Still, he
was a favorite with the captain, and even on the day of his death
Hayward had been heard to say that he believed Wells a man of honor,
whose suit he would favor. The only conclusion which could be arrived at
was, that Wells believed the love of a sister was too strong to give
immediate place to the love of a wife, and he felt that, the brother
once removed, he alone would become the object of Miss Hayward’s
affection. This, though but a flimsy pretext for so awful a crime, was
all that any one could offer in the way of a surmise.

The trial was over. But one decision could be given. It soon was rumored
about camp that sentence had been passed, and that at four o’clock the
next day it would be read to the prisoner, in presence of the whole
division.

The night was wearing on. A form, closely enveloped, approached the tent
of the commanding General. It proved to be the lady Alibamo.

“What is the will of our ‘daughter of the army?’” asked the General,
kindly.

“It is that I may visit Lieutenant Wells, and bring him to my tent. I
desire that an interview should take place between Miss Hayward and the
doomed man.”

The General seated himself at his table, and penned a few words, which
he handed to Mrs. Hinton. She glanced at the contents, and then falling
at the feet of that officer, she seized his hand, and kissing it,
sobbingly exclaimed:

“What! _without_ his chains? God bless you! God bless—”

“There, there! Go! go! Don’t make _me_ weep, or I won’t forgive you,”
returned the veteran warrior, as he turned away.

Alibamo left his tent, and in a few minutes entered her own, in company
with Lieutenant Wells, now free from all apparent restraint.

When Wells entered the tent, Miss Hayward was kneeling by the side of
her camp cot, her face buried in the folds of its coverings. For several
moments not a word was spoken, and, as Wells gazed upon the stricken
sister, he trembled violently, while a groan of intense anguish escaped
him.

Alibamo advanced, and gently touching her companion, said:

“Mamie, my darling, here is _our friend_, Lieutenant Wells.”

Miss Hayward did not raise her head, but reached forth her hand toward
Wells, which, quickly kneeling by her side, he took, and pressed to his
lips.

“Oh, heaven bless you!” he moaned. “_You_ do not believe me capable of
the dreadful crime with which I am charged?”

Miss Hayward tried to speak, but convulsive sobs choked her utterance.

“No, my ever kind and dear friend,” replied Alibamo, “she does _not_
believe you guilty. Nor am I satisfied that Captain Hayward has been
killed. I am under the impression that he was wounded and taken prisoner
by some rebels, who were lurking near our camp.”

“You _hope_ for the best, and so do I; but have you any grounds for the
formation of such an opinion?” asked Wells.

“Yes, and to me the best of evidence. William Nettleton went in search
of the captain. If he was killed, William would have found his body
before this, and returned to us with the intelligence. His continued
absence convinces me that the captain is still alive, and that his
faithful friend Nettleton is at this moment following him. It is this
hope which gives me fresh courage, and I believe a few days will see you
free, and your name as untarnished as it should be. I wished to tell you
this, and I also wished Miss Hayward to express to you personally, her
confidence in your innocence; hence, I brought you here. You may leave
us now, as my poor friend is too much agitated to converse.”

Wells was about to depart in silence, but Miss Hayward for the first
time raised her face, and her tearful eyes met his own. He sprung
forward, and kneeling before her, pressed his lips to her white
forehead, and said:

“That look is worth to me years of happiness. But, you can read my heart
_now_. When I am _proved_ innocent, then I will speak the words which
must not, till then, pass my lips. God bless you!”

He arose to depart, but was met by Captain Walker, who had just entered
the tent.

Walker cast a rapid glance around him, and placing his finger upon his
lips, enjoined silence upon all. Wells stood, with arms folded, sternly
and suspiciously gazing upon him, while Alibamo asked:

“What are your wishes, sir?”

“To serve you and your friend,” was the reply, spoken in a low voice,
and with apparent hesitation.

“It must be an important service which could render pardonable the fact,
sir, of you having, unannounced, and so rudely, intruded upon our
privacy,” said Mrs. Hinton.

“It _is_ an important service. No less than the rescue of——will you be
seated?”

The parties seated themselves in silence, when Walker continued:

“You must pardon me if I speak plainly, and directly to the point. It is
necessary that I should be brief.”

“Proceed, sir.”

“Miss Hayward,” continued Walker, turning toward the lady, “I must give
a few words of explanation to you. I _did_ love—_do_ love you now. You
need not shrink from me. You will, upon hearing my words, understand me
better. No man loves without hope, until there arises between him and
the one beloved some impassable barrier. The barrier which arose to
blast _my_ hopes was, your previous love, and the unfortunate
circumstance which has made me an unwilling witness against one to whom,
as I think, your heart still clings.”

“You will please be brief in comment, and come as quickly as possible to
the point in question,” replied Mrs. Hinton, as she observed the
agitation of Miss Hayward.

“I come to the point now. I know Miss Hayward is very unhappy, and I
would not add to it. I would save her lover.”

“To whom do you refer?” asked Wells, coldly.

“To you, sir,” was the prompt reply.

“I can not claim the title you honor me with, in connection with that
lady. Besides, she might not thank _you_ for such a service.”

“Oh, yes! yes!” eagerly replied Miss Hayward, as she gazed upon the
speaker.

“Stay one moment, Miss Hayward,” answered Wells. “Let us first learn in
what manner my deliverance can be effected. Captain Walker, you can
proceed.”

“You speak very coldly, Lieutenant Wells, to one who comes to offer you
service. But, before I proceed, I must exact a promise, that if my
proposition is not accepted, those to whom my words are addressed will
make no exposure of the same.”

There was a nod of assent, and Walker proceeded:

“I will not deny the fact that solicitude for Miss Hayward impels the
act. But of this no more. Lieutenant Wells, you are unbound and
unwatched. Place your sash across your breast, as worn by the officer of
the day. I will give you the counter-sign, and thus you will be enabled
to pass the pickets, and make good your escape. You can secure a safe
retreat, and, after the excitement of the mur—of this unfortunate
affair—has died away, Miss Hayward can be apprised of your place of
concealment, and take such action in the case as her judgment or heart
may dictate.”

A deathlike silence reigned for a moment, during which rapid glances
were exchanged between the friends. At length Wells asked:

“Captain Walker, would not an escape imply, upon my part, an
acknowledgment of the crime of which I am accused?”

“It might, in the estimation of many. But, you are generally believed
guilty. What matters it what your actions imply to _them_? Your friends
here, who have already made up their minds, will merely look upon it as
a desire upon your part to escape a certain, an unmerited, and a
dishonorable death.”

“And you will assist my flight?”

“I will.”

“And will you afterward convey Miss Hayward to me if she will come?”

“With pleasure; you but anticipate my intended services.”

Another rapid and significant glance passed between Mrs. Hinton and
Wells, which was not observed by Walker.

“One thing more, Walker: do _you_ believe me guilty of murder?”

“H’m—I _did_.”

“And _now_?”

“I _may_ have been mistaken. But, be that as it may, I will assist your
flight.”

“Are you ready?” asked Wells, rising.

“I wish you to return to your cell, and when all is ready, say _two or
three o’clock_, I will come for you.”

“But I will not go!” was the firm reply.

Walker perceived his mistake, and quickly added:

“As you please, sir.” And turning, he was about to leave the tent, when
he was confronted by the “officer of the day.”

“Captain Walker,” he said, sternly, “you feel an especial interest in
Lieutenant Wells. I did not suppose so, but learned the fact from your
conversation. I am glad you _do_ feel so great a friendship for him. You
shall have opportunity to make it manifest. You shall become his
Pythias!”

“What do you mean, sir?”

“This: that the sentence of Lieutenant Wells will be read to-morrow
afternoon at four o’clock. In the mean time, you, as his dear friend, do
not wish to see him confined, and will most cheerfully take his place in
the prison, and wear his chains. If the lieutenant is _present_
to-morrow at four, you, as his hostage, will be released. If he should
escape, as you have advised, of course you will be held as an aider and
abettor in that escape; and when you receive that punishment your guilt
deserves, you will have the consolation of knowing that you suffer for
the benefit of your very dear friend! Soldiers,” commanded the officer,
“place the irons upon Captain Walker, and convey him to the guard-room
in the old log-building.”

“Are you mad? You _dare_ not do it!” yelled Walker, as he foamed with
rage. But the soldiers promptly obeyed the command, and Walker was taken
from the tent.

“This indignity shall be avenged!” but he was carried quickly forward,
and the guard-room door soon closed upon him.

“You will be at liberty, upon your parole of honor, until to-morrow at
four o’clock, Lieutenant Wells.”

The officers shook hands and separated.




                              CHAPTER VI.

               _The Gunpowder Plot and the Conspirator._
                        _The Mystery Unfolding._


JUST as the fading twilight was yielding to darkness, and before
Lieutenant Wells had been removed from his cell by request of Alibamo, a
scene occurred to which we must revert.

The room in which Wells was placed was in the wing of a log-house, just
in the rear of the brick school-house to which we have alluded. Two
doors led from this apartment, one opening into the garden, the other
into the main building. This latter door had been firmly secured. Near
that opening into the garden, was a small window, the only one in the
apartment. As the guard was stationed at the door, escape from the room
was impossible. Surrounding this garden were a number of hedges running
in various directions, some of them forming the street fence, while
others ornamented the winding gravel walks.

As soon as it was quite dark, a person closely enveloped and disguised,
emerged from among the tents, and passed cautiously along in the still
intenser darkness of the hedge shadow. Ever and anon he would pause and
listen. Finally he reached the further hedge, remote from the camp. He
paused a moment, and then gave a low and peculiar whistle. It was
immediately answered, and two men joined the first comer.

“Are you ready?”

“No!” was the answer.

“And why not?”

“Because we have not received our pay.”

“Is that the _only_ reason?”

“The only reason after you have given us full instructions.”

“Where is your powder?”

“In the upper part of the garden, under the hedge. We have secured eight
twelve pound shells which we took from that battery over yonder. Powder
enough to blow a mountain to the devil.”

“Well, here is a hundred apiece. When the job is done, you will find as
much more in the hollow log that I pointed out last night. Be careful
and make sure work!”

“Well, your instructions!”

“You will follow the outer hedge. Creep along with great caution, and
make no noise. There will be no danger, as the guard are not on the
north side of the camp. When you reach the log-building in the rear of
the brick school-house, you will observe a small wing, or addition,
extending to the rear. At the back of this wing you will find an
excavation under the house sufficiently large for your shells. Place
them in it, lay your train, and then apply the torch. But you must do
this with great caution, as a guard is stationed upon the opposite
side.”

“Don’t be alarmed. Any one near that old log-shanty will go to kingdom
come before to-morrow morning.”

The trio then separated.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Captain Walker was seized and chained by the soldiers, he made a
desperate resistance, but in vain. He soon occupied the little room
vacated by Lieutenant Wells. The door closed; he heard the clanking of
the heavy chains which secured it, and left him in utter darkness. He
stamped, and raved and cursed. Suddenly starting, and wildly clutching
his throat, as if some terrible thought had crossed his mind, he groaned
and sunk upon the floor.

“Fool! oh! fool that I was! I thought if I _pretended_ friendship, and
offered to assist in his escape, all suspicion of this night’s work
would be diverted from me. But now—oh! my God! What is the hour? Hark! I
hear them working under the building! No! it is not the men yet. It is
too early. I dare not tell the guard, for an acknowledgment of any
suspicion of such a plot would be a confession of _my_ guilt. Let me
search for some mode of escape!”

Walker crawled cautiously around the floor, but not a crevice could be
found. Finally, exhausted, he sunk down, giving way to his utter
despair. An hour—two hours—dragged slowly by, which appeared an age of
misery to the wretched man.

“If I give the alarm, even saying that a peculiar sound attracted my
attention, the ruffians who are to do the work, will recognize me, and I
shall, thus implicated, suffer an ignominious death! What is that? Great
God! they are at work! But they are making so much noise that the guard
will hear them, and I shall yet be saved!”

“Don’t make quite so much noise in there, if you please!” exclaimed the
guard, as he knocked upon the door where he was stationed.

“It is not me!” yelled the frantic man. “Some one is at the rear of the
building, trying to dig through—they want to kill me!”

“We will see about that!” replied the guard, as he left his post, and
walked toward the spot indicated.

Walker fell upon his knees and exclaimed:

“Oh! I am saved—saved that dreadful death!”

He bent down, and applying his ear to a small crevice between the logs,
where the mud-mortar had fallen out, he listened. He could distinctly
hear the words spoken.

“Have you silenced that d—d guard?” was asked.

“Yes, cut his wizzen. No danger. Hurry with the train of powder!”

“Gentlemen!” yelled Walker, “don’t go any further. I am not the man!”

“Quick—fire the train!” exclaimed a voice outside.

A flash was seen, and then another said:

“Curse it, the train has failed. Throw the torch among the shells, and
then run!”

Walker waited to hear no more, but throwing himself with all his
violence against the door, he set up a series of yells, which made the
camp ring. In a moment steps were heard, the door was thrown open, and
Walker, livid with fear, and frantic, staggered into the open air,
gasping for breath. When he had sufficiently recovered his fright to
listen, the commander of the squad said:

“The powder-plot has been discovered, sir. There is no further danger on
that head. But you will return to your cell!”

This order Walker was compelled to obey, and he was again left in
darkness, with feelings better imagined than described.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The night wore slowly away. Lieutenant Wells had retired to his own
tent. His calmness of demeanor certainly did not indicate a guilty mind.
Alibamo, too, was wakeful, and strove by every possible kindness to
sustain the heart and hopes of her suffering companion. Miss Nettie
Morton, who had so recently joined their society, was occupying a tent
in company with Miss Sally Long, near that of Mrs. Hinton. They also,
were watchful—anxious for the morrow. But, perhaps, the most wretched
person in that camp was Captain Hugh Walker. No officer would have dared
to place irons upon him and confine him in a rough cell, upon any slight
pretext. Was it not possible that something of a serious character had
been discovered against him? This surmise seemed to haunt him, for he
acted in a manner to indicate the wildest apprehensions of danger.

Morning came at last, and slowly the day advanced. A guard brought
Walker his breakfast, but the man refused to answer any question. During
the afternoon he heard the beating of the drums, and the bugle-blast,
which he well understood was calling the division together for some
important purpose. He felt satisfied that one object was the reading of
the finding of the court-martial in the case of Lieutenant Wells. But,
what part was _he_ to play in the scene? This was the question which
caused his heart to beat with violence, as the chains fell from the door
of his prison, and he was called forth.

He accompanied the guard in silence, and soon entered the hollow square
formed by the three brigades of the division. Walker glanced eagerly
around, and there, standing beside the commanding General, was
Lieutenant Wells, with Miss Hayward leaning upon his arm, and near them
were their female friends. But a few paces distant were the two ruffians
who had been engaged in the powder-plot. All was silent. The General
advanced and said:

“Preliminary to other proceedings, I wish to ask Captain Walker if he
ever before saw these two men?”

The ruffians advanced, rattling their chains. But Walker drew back, and
with forced calmness he replied:

“I never have!” He dropped his head, gazing upon the ground.

The adjutant who held the sealed orders of the court-martial by which
Lieutenant Wells had been tried, then advanced, and was about to
commence reading the document in his hand, when a series of yells were
heard, and in the distance was seen the grotesque form of Nettleton, as
he came bounding along and bellowing:

“Stop the shootin’! Stop the shootin’!”

It was well known throughout the army that Nettleton had remained behind
in search of Captain Hayward. As he approached, the most intense
excitement was manifest. Lieutenant Wells could scarcely control his
feelings, and would have rushed forward to meet Nettleton, had not Mrs.
Hinton gently laid her hand upon his arm, begging him to be calm. Miss
Hayward clung closer to her lover, as she hoped the news about to be
brought by her brother’s friend would relieve her agony of suspense. A
half-suppressed cheer broke from the soldiers, as Nettleton burst into
the square.

He paused for a moment, his breast heaving, and his eyes glaring wildly.
But an instant was sufficient for him to discover that Wells was yet
alive, and that the object of his suspicion also lived. He sprung
forward, and, without uttering a word, seized Walker by the foot, which
he at once drew under his arm; then he as suddenly bounded for the spot
where the commandant was standing, dragging the foot along with him.

Of course this sudden movement on the part of Nettleton had thrown
Walker violently upon his head, and, although he kicked, and squirmed
and cursed, he was dragged along as if he had been a child.

When Nettleton reached the commander, he held the foot of Walker within
a few inches of that officer’s face, and yelled:

“Look! look! General—see them boots!”

Notwithstanding the intense anxiety felt for the result of Nettleton’s
search, the ridiculous figure he presented in his eagerness, and that of
Walker who was twisting and struggling to escape, a general laugh ran
through the division, which was joined in by the commander. Even Wells
could not suppress a smile.

“And what about those boots?” asked the commander, after silence had
been restored.

“Why, I’ve blacked them!” yelled Nettleton.

Another laugh was heard along the line.

“No doubt you have blacked them. But what of this?”

“Why, General, don’t you see them _two hearts_ made with nails, on the
sole of that boot?”

“Certainly I see them. And what then?”

Walker was now permitted to resume his upright position, and he stood
trembling with fear and rage, as Nettleton went on to relate his first
suspicions of Walker, his search for the body of Captain Hayward, his
finding the impression of the footprints standing side by side in the
mud, at the edge of the stream, with the marks of _two hearts_ in the
sole of each boot; and then the finding of the handkerchief in the
water, which Nettleton then produced.

The officer took the white linen witness, examining it closely, and then
said:

“Here is the name of ‘Walker,’ in the corner. William, did you find this
_near_ the place where the murder was committed?”

“Right by the spot where them two boots stood!” replied Nettleton,
pointing to Walker’s feet.

“I can explain this,” exclaimed Walker. “I went to the river that day to
wash, and I stood upon the bank to do so. I presume I left the
impression of my boots there at that time. If I did not, was I not also
present in the morning to examine the spot where the murder had been
committed? And is it a wonder that the impression of my boots should be
left behind?”

“That is certainly true,” replied the General. “But of the
handkerchief?”

“It fell from my hands as I was washing, and I did not take the trouble
to recover it.”

“It is very probable!” replied the General.

“So you perceive,” replied Walker, as he appeared to gain courage, “your
trumped up evidence has fallen to the ground! I did not expect a
combination of both officers and men against me, but I find it so. And
they wish to see _me_ suffer for the bloody deed done by that coward.
The only reason I can assign for this persecution is, that he is in
favor with the _ladies_, and you, sycophants that you are, hope, through
him, to gain favor with his fair companions. No doubt some bargain to
that effect already has been effected!”

Captain Walker had by this time become eloquent, and defiant. Nettleton,
with his too eager perceptions, had failed to foresee the possible
fallacy of his proofs, for hope and prejudice together had prevented any
calm examination of his evidence. With a sorrowful and troubled look, he
turned away. This gave Walker greater confidence, and, in a loud but
hoarse voice he cried:

“And now I demand justice!”

“Which you shall have,” replied the General. “But first answer me; how
did this handkerchief, which bears your name, and which you confess to
having used in the stream, become _bloody_?”

That was another point of interest, and Nettleton paused to listen
attentively.

“I had a bleeding at the nose, and the reason I threw the dirty thing
away, was, I did not think it worth washing!”

“Then some person must have recovered it, washed it very carefully, and
thrown it into the stream again, for _there is_ NO _blood upon it_!”

Walker attempted a reply, but his utterance failed. The General enjoined
silence, and then stepping forward he said, in a voice sufficiently loud
to be heard by all present:

“Captain Walker, I must sum up, before you, the evidence of crimes you
have committed, which have no parallel in the history of the army, or of
crimes which have ever been, or attempted to be committed in any
civilized country. I would give you the benefit of a court-martial, were
there any doubt of your guilt, and even _now_ may _order_ a trial, but
it will only be a formal one. You had better confess your guilt, here,
before all—ask their pardon—make reparation to those you have most
injured, and die repentant!”

“I have nothing to confess!” responded Walker, bitterly.

“Have you no fear of the revelations of these two soldiers?” asked the
General, pointing to the chained ruffians.

“I have no fear! No doubt they have been bribed to conspire with you!
But, vent your spite! Go on!”

“Then, Captain Walker, I will briefly enumerate the circumstances which
have been developed, as well as the _facts_. The morning we left Grand
Prairie you were in command of the squad which escorted the prisoner,
Lieutenant Edward Wells. You had not proceeded far when you were
overtaken by two men. It was a very easy matter to secure an audience
with you as you were in the rear of the division. They suggested that
you should deliver Lieutenant Wells to them, as their commander had an
especial spite against him, and wished to secure his person. You asked
these men (I refer to the two ruffians now in chains and standing by
your side,) how they dared to approach you on such a subject, and they
replied that they had _witnessed your act_ the evening previous, and
that you need not put on airs with them! You then requested these
fellows to meet you the next evening at the upper hedge. You instructed
them to secure a number of pounds of powder for some purpose, which you
would then explain. You met them the next evening. You gave them
instructions. They were about to act upon them, when your outcries from
the cell in which _you_ had been placed, and which Lieutenant Wells had
left only a short time previously, attracted the attention of the guard,
and you were rescued. Prior to this you had offered to assist Lieutenant
Wells to escape, but you wished him to return to his cell and remain
until two or three o’clock. The fiendish act was to be committed between
twelve and one. You _pretended_ friendship, that all suspicion of the
act might be diverted from you. Have I spoken correctly, sir?”

“No doubt you have spoken according to the story of those ruffians!”
replied Walker. “You can not bring against me any _respectable_ proof. I
look to a court for the justice which I have no reason to expect here.”

“Look!”

Walker, who had been shaking like a guilty wretch during the speech of
the commander, turned in the direction indicated. The rough garb had
fallen from the ruffians; their chains were thrown aside, and, to his
astonishment and horror, there stood two of the regimental Union
officers, ADJUTANT HINTON, the husband of Alibamo, and his friend,
CAPTAIN CLARK!

Walker, who now saw how he had been entrapped, and detected in his
infamy, for a moment was utterly unmanned. But, his resolute nature soon
triumphed over his fear. Well realizing that penitence could not save
him, he sprung to his feet and said:

“This is all a miserable, contemptible conspiracy—an effort to make out
a case against me to shield that woman’s pet from the consequences of
his clearly proven crime. Hayward is dead, and can not be made to
answer, else—”

“You lie, you dirty, nasty, murderin’ skunk!”

“What!” exclaimed a dozen voices.

“He lies! the coward that stabs a man in the dark! Hayward is not dead,
but lives, and will soon by his evidence send this murderer to kingdom
come!”

With a shriek Miss Hayward bounded forward, and fell at the feet of
Nettleton, grasping his hands. Wells, who had borne bravely up until
this moment, covered his face, and wept tears of joy and of relief from
the imputation of crime. Sally Long sprung to the side of Nettleton,
and, throwing her arms around his neck she gave him a hearty kiss, which
caused him to roll up his green eyes, and appear in almost as much agony
as if he had been struck in the stomach with a cannon-ball. The word was
soon passed, and the soldiers, catching the fire, made the very welkin
ring with their shouts, while the band chimed in with the stirring
strain: “Hail to the Chief!”




                              CHAPTER VII.

              _A Live Hero—The Retrograde Army Movement._


THE villain Walker was returned to his lonely cell. Lieutenant Wells was
released from all restraint. The soldiers dispersed to talk about the
strange turn events had taken, but the center of attraction was
Nettleton. He was seated in front of the Hinton tent. Close beside him
was Miss Hayward, kneeling, and gazing mournfully into his face, while
Alibamo, Wells, the General, Nettie Morton, Sally Long, the officers who
had composed the court-martial, the especial friends of the parties, and
as many of the soldiers as could get within hearing distance, were
earnestly listening to the narrative of the “body-guard.”

Nettleton went on to relate his meeting the rebel scouts, and the fact
of their having informed him that Hayward had only been wounded and
conveyed toward Wilson’s Creek, by a party attached to the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Price.

[The reader will mark the distinction between Lieutenant-Colonel Price,
who was a ruffian guerrilla, and had broken his parole three times—an
act repudiated by all honest soldiers of either army—and General
Sterling Price, who, although a rebel, always had acted in a gentlemanly
and humane manner to all prisoners of war.]

After listening to the story of William, the General drew from his
pocket the note which had been found at the Ozark bridge, signed
“Charles Campbell.” This note must have been written but a few moments
before the fight took place. The date would be just two days after
Hayward had received the assassin’s stroke, giving about the proper time
for the wounded man to be carried from Grand Prairie to Ozark, at which
latter place Lieutenant-Colonel Price had formed a temporary camp. The
writer spoke of a wounded man in a boat, and against whom Price had an
especial spite. This confirmed the conviction that Hayward had been
taken thither for the especial gratification of Price’s fiendish
propensities. The note also said that he bore the marks of a captain’s
rank, and, in his delirium, spoke of “Net—” which might have referred to
the young lady, Nettie Morton, whom he possibly might have seen in the
distance, upon the bank, as the boat neared the spot where she was
standing, or, as seemed more probable, that the wounded captain was
calling upon Nettleton. At all events, it was decided that the person of
whom Charles Campbell had written, was no other than Captain Hayward. It
is true, he was still almost insensible from his wounds, and was near
the camp of his most unforgiving enemy, but, there was a friend at
hand—an enemy in arms—but a friend to the wounded and helpless soldier,
as are all true men—and he had written that “he _would_ save him!”

“Why should we not hope?” asked Alibamo, as she clasped her friend Mamie
in her arms.

“And why should we not _act_?” cried Wells, as he clutched the hilt of
his sword.

“Yes, we _will_ act,” yelled Nettleton, as he sprung up, and appeared
ready for instant departure.

“Go, William; follow the stream from Ozark, until you find some trace,
and then return to us,” said Miss Hayward, eagerly.

Nettleton turned his gaze upon Miss Sally, for a moment, and then, as if
ashamed of his hesitation, or of his weakness, in exhibiting _any_
symptoms of love, he started with a bound, exclaiming:

“I’m off. Good-by, all!”

He had proceeded, however, but a few steps when he halted, and,
scratching his head, his countenance assumed a most woful expression,
and his eyes rolled wildly about.

“What is the matter, William?” asked Wells.

“_Got to go t’other way!_” was the melancholy reply.

“Why so?”

“O, just a bit of—fun—that’s all!”

“Well, tell us what it is, Nettleton?”

“I can’t! It will break _her_ heart!” he replied, pointing to Sally.

“So it would, William, if any thing dreadful should happen to you!”
replied Miss Long, as she dropped her eyes to the ground.

“There, didn’t I tell you so?” replied the faithful servant, his mouth
gaping and his eyes expanding.

“William,” asked Wells, “do you really _love_ Miss Long?”

“Love her, lieutenant? That ain’t no name for it. Why, can’t you see
yourself that she’s the sweetest darn sk— no, I mean the nicest critter
in the world—exceptin’ Miss Mamie!”

“And does she love you, William?” asked Alibamo, smiling in spite of
herself at the tableau enacting before her.

“_Of course I do!_” replied Sally, proudly and triumphantly, as if a
victory had been won.

“There—there! Do you hear that? Now, don’t you pity me? I believe I am
the most ugly cuss in the world. I never thought anybody would ever love
_me_, and now I find out the gal as I wants most is just the one as does
love me! Oh Lordy, I’m sick, I do believe!”

“All right!” Wells responded, with a smile.

“All right! Not by a blasted sight, sir! Did _you_ think it all right
when you loved Miss Mamie, and thought you had to swing?”

“What! You talk in riddles. Explain.”

“_I’ve got to be hung!_” he roared, but, whether with pain or delight,
none could tell.

“Why, _you_ didn’t have any thing to do with hurting the captain?” cried
Sally, as she advanced toward her beloved.

Nettleton gazed at her an instant with a most singular expression, and
then replied:

“Miss Long, never let suspicion cross that delicate bo— mind of yours,
but like the true turtle-dove, put your trust in the uprighteousness of
your future lord and master, what is to be hanged all on account of the
first time you wrapped them delicate arms of yourn around my long neck.”

“William, what do you mean by being hanged?” asked the General.

Nettleton then went on to relate the agreement he had made with Price,
to return, and undergo the punishment which was about to be inflicted
upon him when that General interfered. He declared his intention of
returning at once, as his “furlough” had run out, and as a “man of
honor” he must return.

“And do you really intend to return?” asked the General.

“_Of course I do!_” replied William, with something of scorn and much of
pride in his tones.

“William, think for a moment. You are now safe. You are with one who
loves you, and with whom you can be happy. Why will you return?”

“General, don’t argue this point with me. I said I would come back, and
darn me if I don’t!” Nettleton started, after having shook the hand of
his friends.

“Stay a moment, Nettleton,” said the General. “I have a letter from
General Price with regard to you.”

Nettleton paused and listened, as the commander, opening the envelope,
read:


                 “Camp near Cassville, Nov. 12th, 1861.

“_To General ——, greeting_:

“A prisoner of war was released from our camp, and permitted to return
to Springfield, on the 9th. It was at first thought that he was a spy,
as he had been seen in and near our camp before, and he was about to
suffer death upon the scaffold, when I saw and questioned him. I became
convinced that he was no spy, but a faithful servant and friend,
searching for his captain, whom he loved. I ordered his release. I gave
him a parole of honor. He promised to return that the sentence of the
‘drum-head court’ could be carried into effect upon him, after he had
given the evidence he possessed, which he declared was necessary to save
an innocent man. I admire his truthfulness. Should he be determined to
return, of which I have no doubt, you will read this letter, which
releases William Nettleton from any further obligation. He will remain
with his friends, and be happy.

“Signed by the A. A. A. G.

                                             “For the Commander, PRICE.”

The effect upon the gallant fellow of the reading of this letter, was
somewhat singular. He stood for a moment gaping around upon the
spectators, as if he had been caught in some mean act. Then a smile came
over his face like sunlight creeping over a rugged mountain top. Soon
his countenance looked like a newly risen sun—fairly blazing with
blushes. Then, with a wild _whoop_, which rung out like a signal, he
sprung into air, rattled his feet together, and once on earth again,
bounded off like a great moose, for the nearest thicket, where to
indulge his “feelings” without restraint.

The crowd dispersed in good-humor, to talk over the strange events of an
hour. If one heart was happier than all, it was that of poor Mamie,
whose joy at the proven innocence of her friend and lover was too
intense for words. In her heart a new hope had also arisen, that her
dear brother would again be restored to her arms, and thus fill up the
cup of her blessings to the brim.

It had been decided by the friends of Hayward, that a search for the
captain would be useless, but it was hoped that Charles Campbell would
give some information which would lead to his discovery, or that
Fall-leaf, a celebrated Indian scout, who had now been absent many days
on the very line of the enemy’s march, would return with some tidings,
by which the actions of the captain’s anxious friends should be
governed.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Army of the Mississippi, having passed from Fremont’s command to
that of General Hunter, had been ordered to fall back from Springfield,
in two columns. The one by the way of the Osage and Warsaw to Tipton,
Mo., on the line of the main Pacific road, and the other by way of
Lebanon, on the main road between Springfield and Rolla, the
south-western branch of the same road. Each place, in distance from
Springfield, was about one hundred and twenty-five miles.

The march of the division to which Captain Hayward’s friends were
attached, which was under the command of the brave Sigel, was commenced
on the morning of November 20th. That division formed the rear of the
entire army. It proceeded by the Rolla turnpike.

Nothing of note transpired until the division was ascending the rolling
hill about two miles before reaching Lebanon, when a horseman, his face
and head streaming with blood, rode rapidly along the lines, exclaiming:

“Fight in front! Fight in front!”

He halted for no one to question him, but kept on his way. No guns were
heard, and many expressed the opinion that it must be a strange fight.
But, as a necessary precaution, the infantry-men were halted, their
pieces loaded, and bayonets fixed. The artillery was charged, and flags
unfurled. As the troops ascended the hill, and looked in vain for a foe,
the question was asked: “Where is the fight?”

This was soon settled, as another messenger rode up and informed the
General that a party or squadron of rebel cavalry, numbering about four
hundred, had attacked a little band of “home guards,” of about thirty,
which had been collected in a valley some twenty miles south of Lebanon,
on the main road, in a place called “Bohannan Mills valley.” Most of the
thirty “home guard” had been killed, wounded or dispersed by the
guerrillas. Then all families in that vicinity known to entertain Union
proclivities, were visited at the dead of night. “Murder and arson” was
the cry. Many poor creatures soon were in the agonies of death.
Husbands, who had rushed from concealment to defend their wives, had
been cloven to the earth; children ran shrieking to and fro, only to be
dashed to pieces by the savages of the Missouri Mountain. It was a
carnival of lust and blood, over which the historian ever must dwell in
horror. And yet, these fiends in human shape were protected by the ægis
of the “Confederate” flag!

Such was the scene depicted by the messenger, when the division was
halted, and a consultation took place. It was decided that, while the
main army went forward, two companies of infantry, a section of
artillery, and a company of cavalry, should be detached to proceed at
once to “Bohannan Mills,” to protect the helpless families, and, if
possible, to punish the rebel horde which had committed such awful
crimes against humanity.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                        _Gone!—The Signal Song._


WE must now take the reader back to Springfield. It was one week after
the exposure and confinement of Walker, and something like a month
before the army had commenced its retrograde movement, as described in
the foregoing chapter.

Walker, after the first paroxysm of his rage was over, settled himself
down to think. Although he had shown a bold front at first, his final
conviction drove from his heart all resolution, and he evinced the most
abject cowardice—the cowardice of conscious guilt, which makes the
strongest tremble.

But Walker was not a man to sit quietly in his cell, and submit to his
fate. His mind having been settled in the conviction that certain death
would follow, he began to form his plans of action. To arrive at any
definite conclusion was no easy matter, as he was chained, and a double
guard placed around his quarters. Yet he had hope—time was given and all
might yet be right. He learned that he was not to be tried by a division
court-martial, but would be removed to St. Louis, in order that a
general court might act upon his case. He also learned that it would be
at least a month, before the army would take up its march. Thus he had
time—time precious to him—for, like all shrewd villains, he had his
confederates, even in the army as well as out of it, and to these he now
looked for his bodily safety.

It was the third night of his incarceration, that, springing to his
feet, he listened intently. There were three distinct taps on the door.

“The rescuers—the gang—I’m saved!” he muttered, as he gave three taps on
the door, in response.

“What’s the word?” was asked from the outside.

“C. S. A. and the Bars!” answered Walker. “And you?”

“Good! Union against oppression!”

“To-night?” asked Walker, with eagerness.

“No, the pal on the other side ain’t for Union. Can’t before day after
to-morrow. Jim goes on then, and though it ain’t my turn, I think I can
get pony No. 2 drunk, and the job can be done. I’ll try.”

“Be cautious. Trust no one without the word. It was the neglect on my
part, thinking it all right, to demand the ‘words,’ which brought me
into this scrape!”

The “rounds” approached, and the sentinel was relieved.

Nothing of importance transpired in camp for the next three days. An
unusual quiet prevailed. It is true, there was much talk upon the
subject of the attempted murder, and many expressions of bitterness
against Walker. Some even went so far as to suggest the hanging of that
wretch before the army left Springfield, lest he should escape. None
were more vehement than a repulsive looking soldier, known throughout
camp as “ugly Jim!” He stated that he had been on guard only a few
nights before in front of the prisoner’s quarters, and that he had every
reason to believe Walker was trying to escape, adding that he wished he
had been satisfied of the fact, as he would have been glad of an
opportunity to put a bullet through the murderous scoundrel.

The party had been drinking freely, and had become exceedingly
communicative. One of the soldiers, whose post was No. 1 on guard duty
that night—that is, in front of the prisoner’s door—swore he would shoot
Walker if he could find any pretext.

“_You_ have no spite against him,” exclaimed ugly Jim, “and _I_ have.
Let _me_ take the matter in hand. I will stand your guard, and if the
villain attempts to move, I’ll riddle him, sure as Potosi lead mines.”

“Enough said. I am on the second relief. I go on at seven and off at
nine; again at twelve and off at two. This will be your time.”

“Good! I shall be on hand!”

Ugly Jim then approached the tent of Miss Hayward, and requested an
audience alone with that lady. It so happened that she was alone,
Alibamo having gone to visit her husband, and Sally being at the time
strolling through the camp with Nettleton.

“If you wish to learn all the particulars about your brother, I think
you can do so,” said Jim, in a tone of great kindness.

“Oh! in what manner?” asked Miss Hayward, eagerly.

“I don’t exactly know. But I will tell you what I _do_ know. You see I
am on guard to-night from twelve till two, over the cell of Walker. I
don’t like the villain any way, but, he told me if I would get you to
come to him, he would tell you all he knows of the matter!”

“Certainly I will go. Call Alibamo, and we will go together, at once!”

“I will,” answered Jim, as he turned to depart. Then pausing, he added:

“Miss Hayward, now I recollect that Walker said you must come alone. He
declared he would not commit himself by speaking before any one.”

“I dare not go alone!”

“Poor child!” exclaimed Jim, as he wiped his eyes. “Do you think you
_can_ be alone when this old soldier, as folks call ‘ugly Jim,’ is near
you? I know my face is ugly, but I don’t think my heart is! Besides, you
won’t _see_ the wretch himself. You will only talk to him through a
crack between the logs, and I shall be as close to you as Walker will
allow. Of course he wont let _me_ hear what he says, but I shan’t let
you be out of my sight, so there will be no danger!”

“Why can we not go at once?” asked Miss Hayward.

“Because I don’t go on post until twelve o’clock, and the other guard
wouldn’t let you speak to him.”

“Then I will come at quarter past twelve. But I shall rely upon you for
protection!”

“You may do that, miss. And I really think you do right. I know Walker
is a _very_ bad man, but he has got to die, and may be he wants to make
a confession to relieve his mind, and to ask your pardon. And I always
think it best to give a dying man a chance to relieve his mind, and
confess.”

“You may expect me!”

Jim bowed, and left the tent.

Twelve o’clock came; the guard was relieved, and “ugly Jim” had taken
the place of his _sick friend_, in front of Walker’s prison. All was
quiet, save the clanking of a chain, a few hurried whispers, and the
opening and closing of a heavy door, which sounds were in close
proximity to Walker’s dungeon. The words “_C. S. A. and Bars_” were
answered by “_Union against Oppression_,” and two dark forms glided to
concealment beside the thorn hedge, while the guard remained at the
door.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The evening dragged slowly along for Miss Hayward. A hundred times she
had almost resolved to communicate to her friends the fact of her
intended visit to Walker, and to ask their advice, and, if need be, to
request that some one should follow in the distance, to lend assistance,
should any be required. But what had she to fear? Walker was secure in
his cell, and one of the faithful guard had promised his protection.
Besides, she had promised to go alone. If she did not, it would imply
suspicion of an honest soldier. Walker might also ask if she had come
entirely unattended, and how could she answer him?

Miss Hayward was naturally timid, and by no means self-reliant. When the
news of the supposed death of her brother reached her, she was almost
paralyzed with grief. But, now that hope had filled her heart, she began
to nerve herself to the task of unremitting search, even though she must
encounter the greatest dangers.

The hour of twelve arrived. Closely muffled in a cloak, she crept from
her tent, and then paused to listen. She heard nothing, save the slow
and regular breathing of the sleepers, and the violent beating of her
own heart. She started, but her steps seemed to fail her, and she leaned
against a tree for support. The thought of her dear brother, and the
probable unraveling of the mystery which surrounded his attempted
assassination, and his present fate, gave her renewed courage, and she
sped onward. In a few moments she had cleared the camp, and arrived in
the center of the garden, where stood the doomed man’s prison. As she
neared the door, the guard asked:

“Is that you, Miss Hayward?”

“It is!” came the low response.

“Approach and fear nothing.”

She had barely reached the threshold, when two forms, darting from
beneath the hedge, threw a heavy blanket over her head, thus entirely
smothering any attempt, on her part, to give the alarm. Who and what her
captors were, she could not divine, or what might be their purpose.
Strange to say, her reason did not forsake her. She felt herself borne
rapidly along, but not a word was spoken. It appeared to her that hours
passed by, and she even longed to hear some word uttered which might
give a clue to the intentions of those in whose power she was, or to
throw some light upon the subject, as to whom her captors were. The
blanket, which was very heavy, almost causing suffocation, had been
removed, and a lighter one substituted.

At length the parties halted, and, seating themselves upon the ground,
the covering was removed, and Miss Hayward was permitted to gaze around
her. Her eyes first met those of Captain Walker. She shuddered, and
turned away. Then glancing at his two companions, she at once recognized
“ugly Jim,” and a person known in camp as “stupid Dick,” both of whom
had served as Union soldiers, for a long time, under Walker. As her eyes
met those of “ugly Jim,” she exclaimed:

“Oh! _you_ will protect me?”

A laugh was the only reply.

“I trust Miss Hayward will permit _me_ to become her protector!” said
Walker, in an assumed tone of kindness.

Miss Hayward did not reply, but gazed around her. She was in a wild
spot. She was seated beside a lovely stream of water, in a deep valley,
while high on either hand were ragged hills or mountains. She knew the
country for at least ten or twelve miles from Springfield in all
directions was quite level, and she judged she must be near the Ozark
country, the first range of whose ridges she had frequently seen from
that point.

“Does not the lovely Miss Hayward deign a reply to her most devoted
lover?” asked Walker.

“What was your purpose in tearing me from my friends, and conveying me
here?” asked Miss Hayward.

“A pardonable one, I think. My life was forfeited in the Federal camp,
and personal interest required me to depart. I could not think of
leaving without you, and so I resorted to a little stratagem. My love
for you must plead my excuse.”

“But I have told you, Captain Walker, that I could not love you. Do you
suppose after what has transpired that I could entertain any other
feeling toward you than detestation?”

“I am aware of that. But, when you know me better, I am sure you will
consent to reward my devotion. I am going to convey you to your
brother!”

“Then I _will_ thank you, at least!” exclaimed Miss Hayward.

“Nothing else?”

She shuddered.

“I must be plain with you,” continued Walker. “I am _not_ what I have
seemed to be while with the Federals. I am a colonel in the Confederate
army, but I accepted a commission in the so-called Union army, that I
might furnish information to my Generals. Or, if you like the term
better, you may call me a spy. These two soldiers have been with me for
the same purpose. And we were not alone. There are now, in the army of
the Mississippi, over three hundred privates, and over twenty officers,
who _pretend_ loyalty to the Federal cause; and I think, when his sister
has become the wife of Captain Walker, or Colonel Brown, he may be
induced to join us!”

“Will you take me to my brother?”

“On one condition, I will.”

“And this condition?”

“Miss Hayward, I love you with all the ardor of my soul. You have become
necessary to my very existence—_are_ a part of my life. When you spurned
me, it drove me frantic, and I am so now. Beware—oh! beware how you turn
this heart, which is yet pure, so far as you are concerned, into a hell
of furies! Pity me! Oh! dear Miss Hayward, pity me!”

“But my brother—what of him?”

“I will tell you of your brother when you have answered my questions.”

“Proceed, sir!”

“Do not speak so coldly. I will be frank with you. Your brother is a
prisoner—not in the Confederate camp, but in a secure place, on the very
stream beside which you are now sitting. The murmuring and singing of
these very waters will, ere two hours, greet his ears with the same
strain. Warble those strains to which I have so often listened while in
camp, and which stirred my soul, and they will be borne direct to your
brother’s hearing, to relieve his brain perhaps from the insanity which
now enchains him!”

“Insanity!” echoed Mamie. “My brother insane?”

“He is a raving maniac! And but one thing can restore him!”

“Oh wretched, horrible news! What _can_ I do to save my brother?”

“You are the only person who _can_ save him. Nor is the task a hard one.
Only a few miles from here is a Confederate camp. A chaplain is in
attendance. He will perform the ceremony which will make you irrevocably
and securely mine. Go with me. Become my wife, and to-morrow I will take
you to your brother, and we will not only restore his shackled feet to
liberty, but his shattered senses to reason. We alone can do it. Can you
assume the responsibility of a refusal?”

Miss Hayward remained silent for a few moments, and then gazed
alternately at the three villains. An unnatural fire lit up her eyes. At
length she said:

“Captain Walker, I do not know but you are even now deceiving me. You
may not know any thing about where my brother is.”

“Ask these soldiers,” replied Walker.

Miss Hayward turned her eyes upon them.

“The captain speaks right,” answered Jim. “He _does_ know where your
brother is. He _is_ crazy and is chained in the—”

“Silence!” commanded Walker. “Do you believe, Miss Mamie?”

“I must believe the worst,” answered Miss Hayward. “Soldiers,” she
added, turning to the soldiers, “do you believe in the truth of Captain
Walker’s profession of love for me?”

“I should like to know why not!” replied Jim, doggedly. “Nobody could
_help_ loving you; even I loves you, but I know it ain’t no use, and so
I don’t say nothing!”

“What have _you_ to say?” asked Mamie, turning to the other soldier.

“Lord, Miss Mamie, I allers loved you, but ‘stupid Dick’ never thinks of
such as you, and so I acted mean just to spite!”

“Gentlemen,” cried Miss Hayward, springing to her feet, “listen to me.
You have wronged me deeply, by aiding this wretched villain, your
captain, to abduct me. I despise, loathe him; and, sooner than become
_his_ wife, I would permit my brother to die as he is, for I know that
he would curse me were I to save him at such a sacrifice. It will be
_but_ death, and I shall suffer very little, for my brother’s pure soul
will scarce have taken its flight, ere mine will follow!”

“Miss Hayward!”

“Silence, Captain Walker. Soldiers, you have human hearts, and this man
has not. I appeal to you. Save me! Find my brother and return him
safely, and I promise to pay you one thousand dollars each. If I fail to
do this, I swear, by the hope of heaven, that I will become the wife of
one of you, the choice to be decided by lots between you!”

These words acted like an electric shock upon the soldiers. They sprung
to their feet and confronted Walker. But he had anticipated the effects
of her words, and stood sword and revolver in hand.

“You would play me false!” demanded Walker, fiercely.

“Guess I would!” replied Jim.

“Take that, then!” yelled Walker.

The report of a pistol echoed through the valley, and Jim fell without
so much as a groan.

“And how do _you_ decide?” asked Walker, turning and pointing his
revolver toward Dick.

“I was only goin’ to help you. I ain’t no such foolish cuss as to think
of marrying a fine lady like that! I’m all right!”

“Prove yourself so, and you shall _have_ your thousand. Deceive me, and
you share his fate!”

As Walker spoke he stepped to a clump of thick bushes, and drew a small
boat from concealment. Handing Miss Hayward to a seat, and preceded by
Dick, Walker entered, and the little craft swept gently along with the
current, down the stream.

They had proceeded but a short distance, when Miss Hayward burst forth,
and sung a wild, thrilling air, which echoed far and wide, through the
valley and across the hills. There was something strangely beautiful in
her song, and something still more strange in her actions. As each
strain echoed over the hills, and gave back the ringing notes, she would
start, and listen attentively, and a gleam of joy would lighten up her
pale face, upon which a shade of disappointment would almost as soon
appear. Her hearers sat in silence, and in apparent wonder.

“Those words are significant!” exclaimed Walker. “What is their import?”

“_She’s_ going mad, too, I opine!” exclaimed Dick. “Better _let_ her
go!”

“Silence!” cried Walker. “Miss Hayward, do you think your voice will
penetrate _his_ retreat?”

She made no answer, but, as the little boat swept onward, ever and anon
the same words, and the same wild music broke the stillness of the
forest, now sounding like a wail of sorrow, and then becoming almost
hushed in hopeful expectation. The words had the appearance of being
extemporized for the occasion, and were as follows:

                 Break those fetters—I am calling—
                   Listen _only_ to my song!
                 I am waiting—loved one—waiting!
                   I have waited—oh, so long!
                 Give but one fond word to cheer me,
                   As I pray, and hope, and weep!
                 Let _thy echo_ say thou’rt near me,
                   As my vigils thus I keep!
                 Echo, as along I glide,
                   This my song, from thy retreat,
                 And I’ll bound to thy dear side!
                   Are we e’er again to meet?
                 Yes, a Seraph from on high
                 Whispers to me, thou art nigh!
                 Friends are waiting—friends are near—
                 Dearest brother—do not fear!




                              CHAPTER IX.

      _The Pursuit—The Perilous Situation—Important Information._


IT was two o’clock in the morning, nearly two hours after Miss Hayward
had been seized, and borne from the camp by Walker and his confederates.
The guard relief had commenced his rounds. The first post visited was
that in front of the door where Walker had been confined. A glance
revealed the prisoner’s escape. The chain which had secured the door was
lying upon the steps, and the door itself was slightly ajar. Walker and
both the sentinels had disappeared. The “long roll” was at once beaten,
and the camp aroused. Scarce had the lines been formed when it was
announced that Miss Hayward also had disappeared. The grief of her
friends, and the rage of the soldiers knew no bounds, and many was the
oath of a terrible retribution uttered against the fiend who had spread
such desolation and sorrow in her path.

It was but a few moments before squads of cavalry were dashing in every
direction in pursuit. There was but little doubt as to how the escape
had been effected. The disappearance of the guard convinced all that
they were in league with Walker, but in what manner they had gained
possession of Miss Hayward was a mystery. No one had detected any thing
unusual in her manner the evening before, and she had retired at her
usual hour.

It was thought, however, that the parties would not have taken any main
road, as the pickets would have given the alarm. They could not have had
more than two hours the start, as every thing was all right when the
twelve o’clock relief went on post, and at two o’clock the escape was
discovered. If Walker had to walk through the fields in order to avoid
the pickets, it would take at least two hours to clear them. It was most
likely that, once outside the lines, friends and horses would be
procured. Still, the distance would not be so great but that our
horsemen hoped to overtake them, and so they set off with a good will in
various directions.

“Are _you_ not going to accompany us?” asked Lieutenant Wells, of
Nettleton, who was seated upon the ground, looking gloomy and sullen.

“Not by a darn sight!” answered Nettleton, doggedly.

“And why not?” asked Wells.

“You go ’long, and let me alone!” he answered, sharply.

There was no time for words, and the squadron departed.

The night passed, during which Nettleton was bitter in his self-reproach
for not watching closer, and would not hold conversation with any
person. As the first dawn of day became visible, Nettleton was seen
crawling upon his hands and knees, in front of the former prison of
Walker, and through the garden, toward the west. His movements were
watched with considerable interest, as all had begun to respect him for
his sagacity, in his peculiar way. At length he returned to his tent,
and, without speaking, carefully examined his double-barrel shot gun—a
beautiful piece which he had picked up upon the Wilson creek
battle-ground, and had been permitted to retain. This he loaded; then,
taking a large artillery ammunition-bag, he went directly to the tent of
Adjutant Hinton. Removing the lid of a minnié-ball ammunition-box, he
filled this pouch with cartridges. His next move was to place some
provision in his haversack; then he started.

“Where are you going, William?” asked Mrs. Hinton.

“Them _boots_!” he replied, pointing in the direction he had just taken
in his hands-and-knees examination.

“What do you mean?”

“Why, _them boots as had two hearts on the soles_ went _that_ way, and
I’m going to follow if I go to thunder!” He waited to hear no more, or
to speak more, but bounded off to the westward.

He had been gone perhaps an hour, when Fall-leaf, the Indian scout
already referred to, entered the camp. He was soon made aware of the
state of things. Fall-leaf was deeply attached to Captain Hayward, and,
more especially so to his fair sister, Mamie. The scout had been but a
short time in camp, when he had given to the General all the information
he possessed with regard to the enemy. This done, he followed on the
trail fast as possible.

For several hours Nettleton kept on his course, now striking the main
road for the purpose of searching for fresh tracks, then taking to the
woods again, to avoid observation. Several times he came upon the
well-known footprints, and a bitter exclamation would escape him. He
kept his course, more from the judgment he had formed as to the
direction Walker had taken, than from the numerous impressions of his
boots. He was ascending a sharp and ragged hill, so heavily covered with
the thorn-bush and small scrub-oak peculiar to that country, that his
progress was rendered very difficult. Suddenly a figure darted in front
of him and concealed itself among the thick undergrowth. Nettleton
brought his gun to the shoulder, and called out:

“None of that skulking, darn ye! Come out and fight fair!”

“Ugh!” responded the voice, and Fall-leaf bounded to his side.

“Oh! it’s you, is it, Mr. Ingen? Well, I’m darn glad you’ve come, for
you can hunt these snarly woods better than me! Any news?”

“You kill ’em—eh?”

“I shall kill ’em, if I only get a bead on the critter!”

“You _did_ kill ’em?”

“Kill who?”

“Dead soldier—there!” Fall-leaf indicated that he meant further on.

“Come on, Ingen,” said Nettleton. He reached the summit of the hill
which overlooked the valley below, and, led by Fall-leaf, began its
descent. They soon reached the stream, and the Indian pointed to the
dead body. Nettleton gazed upon it a moment, and then said:

“Darn me if it ain’t the very feller what run away last night. Walker
has been here, sure!”

He commenced his search at once. He found footprints in the sand, and
among them that of a lady, judging from its small size. The Indian had
also been taking observations. Returning from a clump of bushes, he said
to Nettleton:

“See—canoe—two—White Bird—so!”

Here Fall-leaf indicated by action, that two men had drawn a boat from
concealment in the thicket, had entered it, as indicated by tracks in
the sand, and had proceeded down-stream.

“Well, they’ve got rid of one scoundrel, any way. It will only be man to
man, and I feel myself to be a match for any dozen such skunks as that
Walker. They can’t have much the start!”

Both Fall-leaf and Nettleton walked rapidly forward along the bank of
the stream. At length—and it was almost a simultaneous movement on the
part of each—they stopped, and bending forward, held their ears close to
the ground.

“By thunder!” cried Nettleton, “that’s _her_ voice!”

“White Bird caged—_she_ no sing!” replied Fall-leaf.

“Ain’t you a darn fool? Don’t you know that White Bird, as you call her,
has got a right to expect some of her friends will be after her, and so
she sings that they may hear her voice, echoing up and down among these
hills, and know where to find her?”

“Ugh! good—white hunter no fool!”

Again the voice was heard, and this time so clearly as to leave no doubt
upon the mind of our hero, as to who the singer was. Like a deer he
bounded off in the direction indicated. The music died away and all was
still. But the two men paused not.

Upon a sudden they emerged into an open field of about four acres, near
the center of which were two large stacks of hay. The river at this
point took a bend, and the two pursuers struck directly across the open
space. Just as they reached the stacks, Fall-leaf darted close in to the
base of one of them, taking the attitude of a listener, and making a
significant sign to Nettleton.

“What is it?” asked Nettleton.

“Hark! Soldiers! Horses! Whoa! Hark!”

Nettleton listened attentively, and then said:

“There is a party of soldiers coming. It _may_ be our men who have been
in search of Miss—— of the White Bird; but, it is well enough to keep
close. It may be the rebels merely moving camp. And if this is so, Mamie
must be with them. The sounds are coming nearer—crawl under the hay,
red-skin—way under, out of sight.”

This was effected with some difficulty, when a party of rebel
guerrillas, numbering about sixty, rode into the field, and proceeded to
form their camp directly in the vicinity of the hay-stacks, under which
the two men were concealed.

“Well, I guess we’ve got into the right shop!” said Nettleton to
Fall-leaf. “We are cooped up here close enough for a while, but, Miss
Mamie must be with this crowd, and when dark comes, we can scout around
and see what we can do. Lay quiet, Ingen!”

“White hunter knows! Make good Ingen!”

The day dragged slowly away. Toward night a party of the rebels came for
forage for their horses, but the hay was tumbled from the top of the
stack, and our friends were not discovered. The guerrillas’
conversation, however, was listened to with the greatest interest by
Nettleton.

“So Colonel Brown, or Walker, as he is called, came within one of being
done for in the camp of the Yanks at Springfield?”

“Yes, so he says.”

“What the devil does he want with the gal?”

“Oh, some love affair, of course.”

“The gal was happy, for she was singing like a nightingale.”

“Oh yes! No doubt she was dazzled by the prospect of being a colonel’s
wife.”

“Who is she?”

“Don’t know.”

“My eyes! but she _is_ a beauty!”

“So much the better for him.”

“Where was he going with her?”

“Oh, below—taking her to her brother, I believe.”

“Where is that?”

“Down in the _old mill_!”

This was all the conversation heard by the adventurers. But, the rebel
troops did not move again until late in the next day, and our friends
were compelled to remain quiet. They had learned sufficient to convince
them that Miss Hayward was _not_ with this band of rebels, but was being
borne still further from them. They cursed the chance which had thus
entrapped them, and prevented their overtaking the captive at once.
Still, they resolved to keep up the pursuit, and they had learned that
at _some mill_ the lady was to be conveyed, and that her brother was
there. Patiently they waited until they could emerge, and finish their
journey.




                               CHAPTER X.

                               _Hayward._


IT is time the reader was enlightened, somewhat, as to the fate of
Captain Hayward.

The wound he had received the night of the attempted assassination, was
severe, but by no means fatal. The loss of blood had rendered him very
weak, and for some time he remained insensible.

At the moment the blow was inflicted, there was, upon the other bank of
the river, and watching the Federals, a squad of rebel cavalry scouts.
The water into which Hayward was thrown soon revived the wounded man. He
was seen by this band, and carried to the house of an officer of the
Confederate army, not half a mile from the spot. Here his wound was
dressed. It was not long before an order reached them, signed by
“Colonel Brown,” to convey him to the camp of Colonel Price, at Ozark.
This order was law, and immediately after the Federals left Grand
Prairie, a boat was procured, and Hayward placed in it. But half
conscious, he reached the Ozark bridge at the critical juncture already
described in the chapter referring to the interview between Nettie
Morton and Charles Campbell, and the interruption by Colonel Price, the
rescue of Nettie by Fall-leaf, the approach of the Union forces, and the
resolve of Charles Campbell to save the wounded captain.

It was at the moment when Price was in pursuit of the Indian that
Campbell, taking advantage of his absence, and observing the approach of
the Federals, hastily penned the note previously referred to and then
pushed off with the boat, down the stream, in order to effect his escape
with the prisoner.

He began to hope that success would crown his efforts. The battle
favored his flight. All that day and the night following, he pursued his
course. It was his purpose to follow the Gasconade until he had reached
the point nearest Rolla, where he supposed he would be free from the
roving bands of rebels, who were so numerous in the vicinity of
Springfield. But his hopes were doomed to disappointment. Colonel Price,
anticipating the direction he had taken, immediately dispatched one
Lieutenant Lewis, a most tireless wretch, with a squad of ten men, to
intercept Campbell, and the prisoner captain.

Just as the morning dawned, Campbell saw the pursuing party approaching.
Pulling for the shore, he lifted Captain Hayward in his arms, and bore
him into a mill, which stood near at hand. There he quickly concealed
his charge in an upper loft, and returned to meet the rebels. He stated
he had been captured by a party of the Federals and conveyed to that
point, and that they had there released him upon his parole of honor.
This story was generally believed, although one of the band appeared to
be incredulous, and left his fellows for a pretended search. Not
observing his absence, the remainder of the rebel band returned without
him, taking care, however, that Campbell was not left behind.

When this person entered the mill, he found Hayward leaning upon his
elbow, quite conscious, but too weak to move. He paused before the
wounded man, and was silent, Hayward saw, and recognized him.

“Are friends near?” was his feeble question.

“I am the only friend you have got in these parts, and I reckon as how
‘ugly Jim’ ain’t just the man you want to see!”

“You are one of my own men!” returned Hayward.

“That’s a p’int as will admit of some argument, as the lawyers say! I
may be _your_ man when I am in Springfield, but you are _my_ man now! So
don’t kick up any fuss, and after I have made you fast, I’ll tell you
the rest. Ha, ha!” he muttered to himself, “but Walker shall pay me well
for _this_!”

Saying this the rebel rascal left the mill. Not far from this mill, in a
wretched log-hut, lived an old woman, who gloried in the title of “crazy
Madge,” and of whom the rude backwoods people of the vicinity stood in
fear, as it was almost universally believed among them that she was
possessed of the devil. She told fortunes with great correctness, and
employed the most singular modes in doing this, such as burning powder
and strange incense, and the uttering of fearful imprecations, and
unearthly sounds.

The mill was owned by one Bohannan, a captain of Confederate guerrillas.
Since the commencement of the war, it had not been in operation, except
on rare occasions. About one mile above Bohannan’s mill, there was
another mill, of smaller dimensions, which had formerly been owned by a
thorough Union man, who, becoming a refugee, had abandoned this mill,
also. So when the residents in that region, or any of the straggling
rebel bands, had occasion to grind their grain, they always went to the
upper mill, more especially as it was believed that “crazy Madge” had
taken full possession of the lower one after its proprietor left, and
that, being occupied in sacrilegious rites, it was very generally
believed to be unsafe to venture in that vicinity. Even the most
reckless and hardy of the guerrillas held the spot in awe, and avoided
it at all times.

Madge was seated in her own door when Campbell entered the mill with
Hayward in his arms. She watched him closely, but uttered no word. She
saw him emerge, and meet the rebel band. She watched their departure,
and then discovered the newcomer, “Grouse Green,” as he was known. When
he came forth from the mill, Madge still was seated in the cabin
doorway, smoking her pipe. She did not even raise her eyes, or pretend
the least consciousness of his presence, until, with a rude slap upon
her shoulder, he said:

“Come, old woman, I want you!”

The old creature pretended not the least surprise, but, raising her
snake-like eyes to those of the speaker, she said:

“Does the son of Belial wish to know his fate? I need not the aid of my
magic charms to point it out to me. In less than a month, the most
horrible death—”

“Bah, you old crone! I’d dash your brains out for a copper, you infernal
croaking old buzzard! I don’t come to have my fortune told, but I want
you to serve me, and you shall have gold—do you hear, old woman? No
fooling now, and gold is yours!”

“Gold! It is the master-key to human hearts! And what am I to do for
gold?”

“My bidding! First, I want a set of chains! Have you such things in your
infernal den?”

“You can have them for gold!” she exclaimed, tottering to a closet, and
rattling the cold iron. “I always keep them—it is necessary to my
trade!”

“Now for the bargain, old hag. You saw me enter that mill just now?
Well, there is a captain confined, or will be confined before I leave
him, in the upper loft. He will be fastened. You must feed him daily,
just enough to keep life in him. I will give you a hundred to start
upon—more money than you ever saw, old woman, and when I return, if you
have well done your duty as keeper, I will give you another hundred.
Will you be faithful and keep the prisoner in safety from rescue?”

“I swear it by my magic art!”

“Bah! blast your art! Swear it by the gold you will receive, and I’ll
believe you. But come!”

Green reëntered the mill followed by old Madge. He seized the helpless
Hayward and bore him to an upper loft. There he fettered him with the
chains.

“And now I shall leave you here until we can attend to you at a more
convenient time!” he muttered, as he gazed exultingly upon Hayward. He
was about to leave him alone.

“Stay but a moment!” cried the wounded man. “Tell me of my sister!”

“She has become the wife of Colonel Brown, of the Confederate army, or,
as _you_ know him, Captain Walker, of the Federals!”

“Liar!” cried Hayward. “But no! I will not use such terms now. Do you
know who struck the blow which so nearly deprived me of life?”

“Yes; it was William Nettleton! He is also enlisted in the service of
Walker. And I will tell you more. In two days after you disappeared,
Lieutenant Wells was hung for your murder. Your sister fled with Walker,
who pretended the greatest friendship for her. _I_ performed the
ceremony, and to-night they are not three miles from you.”

Hayward had become insensible, and sunk to the floor. Green saw this,
and motioning to the old woman, they left him alone.

“That is the game I want _you_ to play!” said Green, as they emerged
from the mill. “Of course, all I have told him is false. But I want you
to carry it out, because Colonel Price wishes it as well as Walker, and
as he is a most dangerous man to our cause, I don’t care how poorly he
gets along. It would be a good thing for us if he could never take the
field again. So see that you do your duty!”

Madge received her money, and agreed to follow all the instructions he
had given her.

Green now returned at once to the camp, and reported to Walker. It was
just before the decision of the court-martial had been given, and that
officer was free, not only from restraint, but from any thing which had,
as yet, assumed a definite form. He was delighted with the intelligence,
and resolved to take advantage of it soon as Wells could be thoroughly
crushed.




                              CHAPTER XI.

                   _The Prison—The Wheel-room—Caged_
                     _The Life and Death Struggle._


WE left Miss Hayward in the little boat, in the custody of Walker and
stupid Dick. For several hours they sped rapidly onward with the stream.
They encountered the party of rebels of which we have made mention, but,
as Walker, or Colonel Brown, was the officer highest in rank, no one
attempted to interfere with his project. The boat kept its course until
it came upon a broad flat which appeared to be some five or six miles in
length, and perhaps one in breadth. This, Walker informed Miss Hayward,
was the “Valley of Bohannan!”

“And,” said he, “your brother is confined in yonder mill!”

Miss Hayward gazed a moment upon the structure, and then burst forth in
the same wild strain she had sung so frequently during her boat voyage.

“It is folly for you to attempt to attract his notice by your voice. He
is a close prisoner and a maniac, and nothing but your constant presence
and attention will ever cause his reason to return!”

“What do you intend to do with him and myself?” asked Miss Hayward.

“I intend to take you to your brother. I intend to let you see him in a
wretched garret, with no hope of recovery, or of even life, unless you
come to his aid. I intend to permit you to _gaze_ upon this scene, but
not even to speak with your brother, or to assist him in any manner,
until you are my wife. Then you shall be free to attend to all his
wants, to provide for his comfort, to restore him to reason, to life and
to liberty.”

Miss Hayward bent her head upon her hands and wept.

“I will not ask for your final decision now!” continued Walker. “I will
wait until you have seen your brother, which will be in a few moments.”

The boat was drawn to the shore, and Walker, turning to Dick, said:

“I will dispense with you now. Go to Joe’s farm. Follow my instructions
as to storing the house with provisions, and at least one comfortable
bed. Miss Hayward, it is a beautiful place of which I speak, and, in
case of your refusal to perform all that I wish voluntarily, or to save
your brother, I shall be compelled to take advantage of a friend’s
mansion, in case I can not effect my escape with you to Arkansas. This I
doubt being able to do, and more, I don’t know that I shall run the
risk, as I am only a subordinate, and some of my superiors _might_ order
your release. You perceive that I intend to make sure of my prize now
that she is in my keeping. As my wife she will be permitted all proper
liberty, but until you are such, by your own voluntary act, I must keep
you safely from approach by any one.”

Dick had left his master. Walker and Miss Hayward arrived at the log-hut
adjoining the mill, and entered it. Old Madge was there, but she looked
pale and frightened.

“Come here, Madge. What is the matter?” asked Walker.

“The devil’s broke loose!” replied Madge, trembling violently.

“Come, don’t be alarmed; I am Walker. I am the one who sent you the
hundred dollars to keep the man safely. You have done so, I hope.”

“He has just broke loose, and run into the woods.”

“How did that happen?”

“Oh, he heard a voice singing outside, and, in his fever-delirium, said
it was an angel calling him to heaven, and he burst from his room and
rushed up yonder.”

Walker and the old woman conversed together in undertones for a few
moments, when he turned to Miss Hayward and said:

“Your brother, in his delirium, broke his chains, and is at large in the
mountains. He will not return here, and I think it doubtful if I can
find him. He will, most likely, make his way to the Federal camps. But,
come with me; you shall see where he was confined, and then learn my
further intentions.”

Walker seized the unresisting maiden by the arm, and drew her into the
mill. Up the dirty stairs she went, and finally entered the room, or
attic, where the unfortunate brother had been detained prisoner. She
shuddered as she gazed around her.

“Now,” said Walker, “I will show you _your_ room—one you shall occupy
until you are Mrs. Colonel Brown.”

He drew her still further on, and opened a massive door, which grated
upon its hinges. She gazed in. It was a small apartment into which the
carpenter usually entered when he wished to repair the great water-wheel
which set the mill in motion. This room, or rather aperture, was of
construction unlike any apartment intended for occupancy. There was a
platform about ten feet in width, which formed the only flooring. Then a
great opening beyond, through which the main wheel extended upward about
eight or ten feet, entirely filling the opening in the floor. Any man
confined in this apartment would find little difficulty in effecting his
escape, provided he was an expert swimmer, and the mill not in motion.
But the manner in which an escape must be effected would be as follows:

When the mill was running, the wheel being then in motion, the water was
thrown in large quantities in every part of the room, and its inmate
could scarcely prevent drowning by catching his breath at intervals. To
attempt to spring into the wheel—which was formed something like the
wheel of a wagon, the rim, or tire, however, being about twenty feet in
breadth, with crevices, or brackets, for catching the water which
propelled it, and the braces answering as spokes bearing proportion to
the rim—would almost assuredly be dashed in pieces in the attempt to
gain the interior. But, once there, he would be whirled round and round
until he could gather his energies for a jump when that portion of the
wheel in which he was perched was _down_, or nearest the bed of the
stream. To leap out _into_ the river would be a task equally perilous to
that of springing in. When the wheel was _not_ in motion, one could step
into the opening, slide down the rim with great ease, spring into the
water, and gain the shore in a moment.

Miss Hayward gazed into this room or vault with a fainting, sickening
sensation; but she did not speak. It appeared as if hope had almost left
her heart, now that she found her brother gone, and she nerved herself
for any fate that might overtake her.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was, as we have stated, late in the afternoon before the rebels
encamped around the stack where Nettleton and Fall-leaf were secreted,
took their departure, and up to that time the two faithful pursuers were
unable to venture forth. At last all was safe, and they emerged from
their concealment, and gazed around them. No living person was to be
seen. A meal was hastily prepared, after partaking of which they resumed
their journey at a rapid rate. All night they plodded along, taking care
to see that no _mill_ was passed upon the route. As the morning dawned,
they found themselves in an open space of considerable extent, and close
by the stream was a mill. This was carefully examined in every nook and
corner; but nothing was found. They made inquiry of a woman living in a
cabin near the spot, and learned that, a mile further on, was another
mill of larger dimensions, belonging to one Bohannan. For this place
they immediately bent their steps. Arriving, they were met by old Madge,
who immediately commenced her mummeries in order to divert their
attention. The Indian gazed upon her a moment, as if half in awe, and
half in fear, but Nettleton did not pause, and exclaimed:

“Come along, Ingen; I expect here’s the place.”

They entered the mill. The Indian remained at the door to prevent any
egress, while Nettleton commenced his search. Up and down, high and low,
the search was prosecuted.

Walker being then within, had observed the approach of Nettleton and the
Indian. His first impulse was to fire upon them; but he knew if his aim
proved inaccurate he might then bid adieu to life, and so he resolved to
resort to stratagem. He seized Miss Hayward and sprung into a wheat-bin,
close by the door of the wheel-room we have described. He soon buried
himself and his prisoner among a lot of old bags, husks and refuse, and
cautioned her to remain quiet, as a band of Kansas cut-throats, who
regarded neither the life or person of a pretty woman, were at hand.
This had the effect to keep Miss Hayward quiet.

Nettleton had completed his search. The lower floor of the mill had been
carefully scrutinized—its closets, its bins—except the small one near
the wheel-room, which had escaped his notice.

“I wonder if there is any thing under the mill?” queried Nettleton.
“I’ll call, and see if that does any good. Captain! Captain Hayward!”

The voice was at once recognized by Miss Hayward, who vainly struggled
to reply; but Walker held a handkerchief so tightly over her mouth that
she could produce no sound. At length, by a desperate effort, she
removed his hand and shrieked:

“Here, William! here!”

“Where? where?” cried William, as he sprung toward the bin.

“_In the wheel-room!_” yelled Walker, smothering his voice so far as to
drown the exact direction in which it came.

Nettleton bounded into the wheel-room, closely followed by the Indian,
who now supposed their friends to be found. Quick as lightning Walker
sprung from the bin, and slammed the door upon them, bolting it
securely. He then started for the mill-gate, which, being hoisted, would
set the large wheel in motion.

As soon as the door was closed upon Nettleton, he rightly suspected
treachery, and throwing himself with all his violence against the door,
tried to force it. But in vain.

“Quick, Ingen; jump into the mill-wheel, and down into the water!”

They were about to adopt this plan of escape, when the wheel started
with great rapidity, rendering it seemingly impossible to do so.

“Now,” yelled Walker, as he seized Miss Mamie and bore her from the
mill, “you shall see the folly of opposing me! You shall see how I
triumph over _all_ obstacles, and how those who oppose me perish!”

Inside of the mill, and near the door, was a quantity of hay and
unthreshed grain, stored there for use by some neighboring farmer or
guerrilla. Striking a match, Walker lit the inflammable material. In a
moment it blazed high, and communicated with the woodwork. Walker only
waited to see this, and then, almost dragging Miss Hayward along, he
reached the river, drew the boat into the stream, and was once more
floating with the current.

“Look, Miss Mamie, is not that a lovely sight?” he cried, pointing to
the mill, now thoroughly enveloped in flames. “Nettleton is there, and
Fall-leaf is there, and they have been brought there by _you_. They will
perish in those flames, and you must be responsible for their murder.
When will you learn that it is useless to oppose me, and cease to do so?
To submit to my proper and honorable requests is the only way you can
save your friends.”

When Nettleton and Fall-leaf found their mode of escape thus cut off,
they naturally turned to each other for advice. But the water thrown
from the wheel so blinded and choked them that they could not hold
conversation at all. It was not long before our prisoners became aware
of the fact that, however disagreeable the water might be, they were
likely to be visited by an element, and that very soon, far more
disagreeable, under the present circumstances. The flames were seizing
upon every part of the mill, and all around them soon became a mass of
lurid, destroying light. The rafters, flooring and upper work threatened
to fall at any moment. Still the room in which our friends were confined
remained unscathed, surrounded as it was by water. But, it must soon
yield to the fiery element. The wheel still moved; yet it seemed as if
its speed was somewhat lessened. At length Nettleton yelled:

“Ingen, I’m going; take your chances!”

With a bound he sprung into the wheel. He escaped any severe blow, but,
upon alighting he was tossed, and pitched, and tumbled over, until at
last, catching upon the centre-bar, he held himself until he had made
his calculation as to where his next jump should be. At last he ventured
the hazardous leap, and was precipitated into the foaming waters beneath
the wheel, which in its revolution struck him lightly, calling forth a
grumble or a grunt. But Nettleton battled bravely with the rushing
waters, and at length, half dead with suffocation, he crawled upon the
bank as the burning rafters of the mill were falling around him.

“Wal, I suppose Ingen is roasted alive, and I must do the work alone.
I’m darn sorry. And I’ve lost my gun, too. But I ought to be glad that I
didn’t lose myself. The villain, but won’t I roast him if ever I lay
these hands on him!”

Thus he muttered as he sat for a moment gazing upon the appalling
spectacle before him. He then sprung up, and seeing the old woman, at
once started for the cabin. Madge met him at the door.

“Will you have my services, to tell you truly the fortune that is in
store for you?” she asked.

“Your services. Yaas; I’ll have you tell me all about affairs here in
this quarter, and if you don’t own up every thing, I’ll put you in this
pile of logs and roast you, as sure as you are a she woman. Do you
understand?”

“I have but little to reveal of the circumstances to which you refer.
The Federal officer _was_ in the mill a prisoner, but escaped, in his
delirium, and is now somewhere out in the mountain. Walker and the lady
were in the mill, but are now out of reach, down stream. This is all I
know.”

“And it is enough. Now, you just fork over a good Minié musket—I know
you have a dozen concealed here for the use of your friends, and all the
fixins for settlin’ the hash of your friend, Captain Walker, for him and
me has an account to fix what will require powder and lead, if this
bread-cutter of mine don’t do the job,” he said, handling his
bowie-knife.

Madge only too well read in Nettleton’s face the resolute nature of the
man, and with scarcely a moment’s hesitancy went out of the hut to a
hollow tree near by, and produced from thence an armful of arms, made up
of shot-guns, old-fashioned rifles, and a Minié musket. From these
Nettleton selected, after careful scrutiny, a heavy double-barrel
squirrel gun. Ammunition was also supplied by the woman without
hesitancy, and the pursuer soon found himself equipped in a most
formidable manner.

“There, old gal, you have done the right thing. It is well that you did,
for, as sure as lizards, I should have burned you in your pen if you
hadn’t forked over what I know’d was in your possession. Now, good-by,
and behave yourself. If the captain—my captain I mean—comes back to you,
do you be kind to him, for I tell _you_ it is for your best interests to
be so. Do you believe that?”

“I believe any thing you say,” replied the old creature, betraying her
anxiety to get rid of her visitor.

“You do, eh? Well, jist keep on thinking so, for I shall, mayhap, want
to use you again some of these days. So good-by, and keep your eyes
clean.”

With this injunction he started again for the river, following the
stream for some distance, but finally, for some reason best known to
himself, took to the mountains. Every few moments he would pause and
listen, as if a faint sound met his ears, and then continue his journey.

After Nettleton had escaped from the mill, Fall-leaf began to look
around for some other means of escape. He felt sure that Nettleton’s
leap must be a fatal one—that, if he was not dashed to pieces by the
wheel, he would surely be drowned in the rushing waters. All chance of
escape for the poor Indian appeared quite as hopeless. The flames were
already hissing around him, and curling up the sides of his
prison-house. The fire had weakened the boards, and, just as the flames
were coiling around his form, he made a desperate effort, and burst the
siding from the mill. In an instant he sprung through the aperture,
although the fiery element presented a formidable obstacle between
himself and safety. He alighted, however, with only a few slight
bruises, and, waiting for nothing, bounded forward. He knew if Walker
had continued his journey down the river, he could soon overtake him.
For an hour he did not slacken his pace, and finally, in turning a short
bend in the river, he beheld the boat.

He was about to dash forward to the rescue of Miss Hayward, but he
remembered that he had no gun, his only weapon being his sheath-knife,
while Walker was well armed. He must resort to stratagem. His object was
to watch for opportunity, and when Walker should land, or when the boat
neared the shore, and the thicket favored the movement, to spring upon
him suddenly, and drive the knife to his heart. But the river gradually
grew wider, and Walker kept his boat in the center, too far distant from
shore for any attempt for his seizure to prove successful. All that day
and all the night following, the boat drifted on with the stream. It was
evident Walker was anxious to reach a certain point as quickly as
possible.

The morning dawned just as the little craft shot past the ford on the
Rolla turnpike, near the “ghost swamp,” a locality of weird interest and
novel character. Walker was about to land, near a small farm-house which
stood behind a jutting hill, entirely concealed from the main road, but
before touching the shore, his quick eye caught sight of a dark form
creeping cautiously along the bank. At the same moment he discovered
three horses tied in a thicket only a short distance from the house.
Whether they belonged to friend or foe he could not tell; but the fact
of seeing the creeping form rendered him cautious, and he immediately
pulled for the opposite shore, where he landed.

“Are you friend or foe to the Confederates?” shouted Walker, from the
opposite side of the stream.

There was no response.

“That cursed Dick must have betrayed me,” he muttered. “But, I will
match them yet. Come!”

He dragged Miss Hayward along up the mountain steep. At length he
reached a point of rock which extended far over the valley below. A
narrow footway, not more than ten inches in width, forming a kind of
shelf in the rock, led into an immense cavern, which is known in that
region as the “Silver Cave.” Just in front of this cave was a large,
flat rock, forming an overhanging platform, but to reach this, or the
mouth of the cave, required great care, as the narrow path was the only
manner in which an entrance or exit could be effected. Into this place
Walker conveyed Miss Hayward.

Walker had, when meeting the rebels two days before, provided his boat
well with provisions. These he conveyed with him into the cavern.

He had not observed, however, that he was followed closely, and that the
Indian arrived at the narrow passageway just as the rebel and his
prisoner entered the cave. This was so. The Indian crept up as closely
as possible, and peered over the projecting point which shut Walker from
his view. He was observed.

“And who are you?” yelled Walker.

The Indian was perfectly familiar with the cave. He knew no person could
leave it by the narrow shelf or pathway. He could keep himself
concealed, and if Walker passed a certain point, before he could bring
his gun to bear, he could strike him dead. Walker was a prisoner, with a
watchful and relentless keeper. The Indian replied:

“Ah, White Bird! Fall-leaf here! Fall-leaf save!”

“Is it indeed my friend Fall-leaf?” cried Miss Hayward, joyfully.

“Yes; Fall-leaf save you!”

“Where is William Nettleton?” asked Mamie.

“Gone—gone!”

“Ah! then I have only _you_ to encounter,” yelled Walker, “and, if the
Fates favor me, I shall triumph. I know the Indian has not thought to
provide himself with provisions. I have enough to last us, with care,
for two weeks, and by that time he will starve, for no Federal fool ever
will find me _here_. He dare not leave in search of help, for I should
then effect my escape. So we will play our hands, and see if I do not
hold the trump card. Ha! ha! I can baffle any friend you have, Miss
Hayward.”

“White Bird sing,” said the Indian.

“Yes, I will sing. And as we are now near the main road, some one will
be sure to hear me.”

“Me watch—me wait!”

During the entire passage Miss Hayward had not failed to sing her
echo-song every few miles, hoping to attract attention and gain
assistance. Now that she was so near the public highway, she applied
herself anew to the task. Walker made frequent attempts to silence her,
but could not do it, as he feared, whenever he turned from his watch,
that the Indian would dart in upon him.

Some two years previous, there was a superstitious belief prevailing in
that section of Missouri, that the spirit of a murdered lady appeared
upon the waters of the Gasconade, singing her mournful lays, and gliding
in her death-skiff along the waters. For some time past nothing had been
heard of the “lady-ghost;” but, when the songs of Miss Hayward were
heard, the simple inhabitants began to think that the “ghost-lady” had
returned, and, instead of seeking to gratify their curiosity, were
careful to keep as far as possible away. So it proved with regard to the
cave, after the singing commenced.

Several days passed, and no succor appeared. The Indian kept faithful
watch, and so did Walker, that he might not be taken by surprise.

Walker becoming convinced that Fall-leaf had no gun, several times
endeavored to bring his own to bear upon his vigilant foe, but this he
could not do without placing himself in a dangerous position. Both were
weary for want of sleep, and both would occasionally sink into a fitful
slumber; but, so intent was each upon his object, that the slightest
movement would rouse the sleepers, and each stand ready to meet his foe.
But, as Fall-leaf had no food, he began to grow faint—his firm frame
began visibly to weaken; still, he determined to maintain his watch as
long as life should last.




                              CHAPTER XII.

                       _The Mountain Adventure._


LET us return to the army, which we left near Lebanon. The main force
was to continue its march onward toward Rolla, while a battalion of
infantry, a section of artillery, and a company of cavalry struck to the
west of the main road, and started for the point from which the
messenger had arrived. It was a weary march, as the troops already had
proceeded twenty miles that day. But the dreadful atrocities related as
having been committed by the guerrillas fired the hearts of the brave
soldiers, and they pressed forward with a will.

The troops at last reached the scene of the outrages, in the place known
as “Bohannan Mills Valley.” The deeds of blood and horror had not been
exaggerated by the messenger. Women had been murdered in their beds, old
men were lying stiff and cold, with their brains beaten out, and
children, helpless and weeping, were clinging to their dead bodies or
wandering distractedly around.

The battalion which had been sent to this valley was the one to which
Lieutenant Wells and Adjutant Hinton belonged. Wells was still suffering
from the terrible anxiety of mind which he had recently undergone, but
did not permit his own troubles to interfere with his discharge of duty.
The troops camped in the little valley, to collect the scattered
families, whose remaining members it was determined to take along with
the army in its retreat. Soon word was brought by a mountaineer that the
guerrillas still were infesting the mountain, while the flames of a
burning mill, seen below, seemed to give evidence that the miscreants
still were at their work of blood. This decided the officers to scour
the mountain, if possible, to force the rebels to a fight, for there was
not a man in the Union ranks who did not pant for a chance to meet those
dastards, who, under the protecting folds of the Confederate flag,
committed atrocities at which humanity stood aghast. Wells was soon at
the head of a strong party of dismounted dragoons, and with them struck
off for the hills back of the burning mill. A weary march was brought to
a sudden halt by a deep water gully, over which no perceptible ford
offered a passage. Up and down it Wells passed to reconnoiter. It was an
ugly spot to be caught in by a wily foe, and the troops were so disposed
as to guard against a surprise. The men kept close under cover of the
dense undergrowth, so as not to betray their position should the
guerrillas come upon them. Lieutenant Wells and Adjutant Hinton were
proceeding up the watercourse, when a rattle of fire-arms arrested their
attention. It was evident some kind of a conflict was taking place over
the stream. The volley was not, however, answered by a return; only a
single shot was heard, and then a wild, frenzied shout, as if of
maddened men. After a brief interval, another shot was heard, and a
second paralyzed howl was followed by shouts and curses, plainly heard
by the two anxious senior officers.

“It must be the guerrillas after the poor Unionists who have fled to the
mountain,” said Hinton. “Our men must not be idle when such work is
going on. You stay here, Wells, to watch further, while I go back to
bring up our boys.”

Hinton hurried away, while Wells crept forward to the very edge of the
deep but narrow gully beyond which the sounds of conflict were heard.
Hardly had he secured a spot for observation, ere he was startled by the
crash of the undergrowth and the voices of men not ten rods away. On
toward the lieutenant’s place of concealment came the pursued and
pursuers. The first was but a single man, whom Wells several times
detected gliding along from tree to tree, keeping “under cover” like an
experienced woodsman. He was closely pursued by a band of the
guerrillas, all dismounted, who were making the hills echo with their
demoniac yells. Slowly the fugitive retired, holding his foes at bay by
his sagacious maneuvers. Wells became intensely excited over the scene,
and resolved to rush at once to the brave fellow’s aid, but there lay
before him the impassable gulf over which few men could bound. Finally
the hunted man struck the gully, and saw at a glance that his retreat
was cut off. The enemy saw it, too, for they set up a shout of
commingled derision and pleasure, which so maddened the fugitive that he
yelled:

“Laugh away, you darn skunks. I’ll make more than one of your dirty
carcasses food for the crows before I go under.” And suiting the words
to action, he fired two successive shots from what, apparently, was a
double-barrel fowling-piece. Two of the guerrillas must have fallen, for
ferocious shrieks of agony followed.

Wells could endure no more. There stood before him his brave friend
William Nettleton, hunted by a dozen fiends who must soon overpower him
if aid was not quickly given. He started backward for a couple of rods,
then rushed with almost flying swiftness up to the gully, and bounded
over its sharply-cut edge. For a moment his desperate leap arrested all
attention. Nettleton deemed it a new adversary coming upon him from an
unexpected quarter, and turned, knife in hand, to close in with his
antagonist. What was his astonishment to welcome Lieutenant Wells to his
arms! What a shout followed! The guerrillas quickly sought cover, not
knowing how many others might be lurking on the opposite side of the
ravine to give them a bloody welcome.

“Wells, by the jumping jingo! Where _did_ you come from and where _is_
you going to? Give us yer hand and lend us yer revolver. Ah, got two of
’em. _Hooray!_ Down on yer knees quicker’n lightnin’, for the
woman-murderers are after us, sharp!”

Down the two men fell, just in time to escape a volley from the carbines
of a squad of the murderers. With the dexterity of a squirrel, Nettleton
rushed forward to a friendly tree, and fired quickly three shots from
the revolver. It was a surprise to the enemy, for two of their number
fell, so true had the aim been. The squad retreated to reload, but
Nettleton had no idea of permitting that, and was about to press his
advantage, when a powerfully-built rebel came rushing upon him, knife in
hand, from the right side of the tree, unseen by the undaunted man until
it was too late for the use of his fire-arm. In a moment they were
clasped in the death-struggle. Three or four of the guerrillas rushed to
the spot, only to be shot down by Wells’ deliberate aim. No more
appeared, and the two combatants were left to their fearful work. Each
had seized the knife-hand of the other. Then followed the strain of
muscle for the mastery. The guerrilla, counting upon his tremendous
strength, doubtless hoped for an easy victory; but in that ungainly form
he found a bundle of nerves tough as whale-bone—a human frame elastic as
india-rubber but as invincible as steel.

Down toward the gully the combatants pressed. In vain did the rebel try
to force his antagonist to the earth. The supple form of Nettleton bent
under his adversary’s pressure, but his frame at length rebounded with a
force which bore the guerrilla to his knees. He drew the Federal down
with him, and on their knees the frightful combat was continued. Wells
would have advanced from his concealment to the rescue, but knew that a
rebel carbine would surely bring him down, and thus place it out of his
power to aid his friend at all. Slowly toward the chasm the men worked
their way, struggling like two serpents striving for the death-triumph.
It was an exciting but appalling spectacle, which the sudden roar of
fire-arms on the left did not serve to arrest. A shout followed, which
Wells recognized as that of his own men, who must have discovered a
crossing below, and have come upon the band of cut-throats unawares.
There was a sudden scattering of those concealed in the immediate
vicinity of the hand-to-hand contest, but one villain rushed from his
cover upon the writhing forms of the bleeding men, with the design of
dispatching the unconquered Federal. Wells was upon him like a tiger,
and in a moment cut him down with his sword. Hinton beheld the stroke,
and came rushing up to the spot just in time to behold the struggling
men go over the gully’s bank together.

The two officers hurried to the bank. Some twenty feet below they could
distinguish the forms of the combatants, both apparently lifeless.
Without a moment’s hesitancy, Wells dropped from the brink, and fell
crashing through the dense jungle lining the water’s edge, to the bed of
the stream. He was stunned but not injured, and arose to his feet to
find Nettleton in a sitting posture. Beside him lay the big guerrilla,
silent in death.

“I’ll be danged if that wan’t the ugliest cuss as ever I tusseled with,
breeches-holt, back-holt or rough-and-tumble.” This was his first
ejaculation.

“Are you injured?” anxiously inquired Wells.

“Wal, let’s take a reconnoissance. Here’s a hole in this arm, that’s
sp’iled the only good coat I ever had, dang it! Here’s a rip, too, in
the collar, whar that critter’s knife tried to cut my windpipe. He _did_
scratch me thar, I believe,” he said, fingering his neck, down which the
blood flowed freely. “By Jemima, ef I haven’t lost a finger!” he added,
suddenly holding up his hand. “Now, that’s too bad, ef it is on the left
hand. I rayther think the reb got a mouthful when he chawed that off!”
And thus he would have continued for another ten minutes had not shouts
from above aroused him.

“Who’s come?” he asked.

“Hinton and the battalion.”

“Glory! And have the rebs been caught in a trap?”

“I don’t know how many, but from the shots and shouts I don’t think many
will be permitted to escape.”

“All right. Now jist give us a lift, to see if my shanks is all right.
There, that’s the juniper. Jist look at my back, and see if you find any
holes that want plugging.”

No “holes” were found, and the good-natured fellow came out of the
combat with only flesh-wounds, save the loss of one finger from the left
hand, which the guerrilla had bitten off. Nettleton was much exhausted,
and was finally drawn up out of the gully with no little difficulty,
when the men set up a shout which made the hills ring.

“There, boys, that’ll pay for the bruises; and now I guess you’ll have
to do me another favor—jist rub my shanks and the hinges in my back with
a little whisky, if you can spare it.”

In a moment a dozen pocket-flasks were produced and willing hands gave
him a good rubbing, which gave his limbs new strength. It was evident
that his muscles had been severely overtasked, for he was languid and
incapable of exertion.

Nettleton now narrated the particulars of his and Fall-leaf’s
adventures. Soon the troops were out on the search for Captain Hayward,
while, assisted by a couple of comrades, the wounded hero of the hour
made his way down to the cabin of old Madge. The old creature received
him kindly and at once bestirred herself to make him strong again. The
air was soon odoriferous with the smell of distilling herbs.

A prolonged shout, ere long, came rolling down the hill. Nettleton was
aroused from a sleep into which he had fallen. His two comrades at once
hurried out to ascertain its cause. Old Madge paused in her toil and
said:

“The captain’s found, I s’pose.”

“Hooray!” yelled the invalid, now an invalid no longer. Springing from
his bed he rushed out, and away he went up the hills in the direction of
the still continuing noise. His companions, astonished at his sudden
recovery, followed, and all were soon lost to sight.

Harry Hayward was indeed found, and the cavalcade, bearing him on a rude
litter, after a half-hour’s time, made its appearance coming down the
mountain. Nettleton was at his side, crying like a baby. Wells held the
sick man’s hand, while his face, still expressing anxiety, beamed with
joy. Hayward was discovered hidden in a quiet, cool nook, where he lay
in a very exhausted condition. He had, in his fever-delirium, broken
away from Madge’s custody, but, no sooner was he out in the cool shade
of the trees and rocks than his mind became clear and composed. Weak and
ill as he was he still had strength to seek a place of safety from
pursuit, should it be attempted, as he supposed it would be. At
nightfall he had determined to seek out some respectable looking
farm-house, and on the morrow to cast himself upon the mercy of
strangers, knowing that even though that stranger might be a foe he
could not be more inhuman than men wearing the uniform of Confederate
officers. But the sufferer was spared further efforts. The shouts and
reports of fire-arms Hayward distinctly heard, and at once surmised that
a Union force was at hand. When the men scattered in squads for the
search through the mountain, the captain beheld one of the parties
passing before his hiding-place. It was his moment of deliverance. He
stepped out before the astonished soldiers, who, not recognizing the
apparition, did not at once welcome him.

“My men, don’t you know me?”

“Captain Hayward!” they shouted, as they rushed upon him, and clasped
him in their arms.

He was borne toward Madge’s cabin, to be welcomed on the way by the
gathering men. Wells now appeared. The joy of that meeting can be
surmised. The welkin was made to ring with the glad notes of the
jubilant soldiers. These notes it was which aroused the sleeper in the
cabin, and when at length he appeared, struggling wearily up the hill,
the cavalcade paused to permit the overjoyed parties a few minutes of
undisturbed greeting. Nettleton was not even talkative—a circumstance
indicative of the depth of his feelings—and it was not until the captain
was fully domiciled in the cabin, that he could consent to talk of the
past and its painful incidents. He then narrated the events of Walker’s
plot, as we have here recorded them, ending with the tragedy of the
mill. It was a revelation of intense but most painful interest to the
sick man; but he bore the affliction of his sister’s loss with great
resolution, sustained by the conviction that He who doeth all things
well would not permit the evil one to triumph.




                             CHAPTER XIII.

                  _The Cave and the Contest for Life._


AFTER two days spent in the cabin, Nettleton became excessively uneasy.
From something which had transpired, he conceived that old Madge knew
more of Walker’s whereabouts than she had yet confessed. This
conviction, once formed, was but the prelude to action. Without
informing any one of his purpose, he followed the old woman into the
woods—whither she went in pursuit of her medicaments—having in his hands
a stout rope. In a wild, retired spot, he confronted her.

“Look here, old critter, you’re close-mouthed, when it would be better
for your health to talk a little. Now, you jist tell me where Captain
Walker has taken Miss Mamie. Talk straight, and not a gap in the fence.”

“I don’t know where he has gone,” she answered, rather evasively.

“That is, you are a nat’ral-born know-nothing. Well, it will assist your
memory, perhaps, to stretch your neck a little, jist to take the kinks
out, you know; so pass your shock of tow into this ’ere noose, while I
pull you up on that limb.” And suiting the action to the word he flung
the noose dextrously over her head. She was taken by surprise, and
trembling in every limb, asked:

“Would you hang me?”

“Sartain as there’s a tree and here’s a rope.”

“I don’t know where Walker is, but I think he has a place of refuge down
the river, near the Ghost Swamp. There is a cave in the river’s bank,
opposite to the swamp, where I know his confederates occasionally
secrete themselves. He may have gone there; but, as he has been gone
over two days, I don’t see why he should be there now. It is my opinion,
however, that Miss Mamie, as you call her, is there, as it is the best
place to keep her.”

“Ah, thank you, old Mrs. Crow’s-foot. There is something more on your
mind, isn’t there?”

Madge looked at him inquiringly.

“I know all about your friend’s visit; so do you jist play your cards
right, or I’ll catch ye niggin.”

This allusion to her “friend” startled the old woman.

“He was no friend of mine; he came along on his own account, and I only
gave him bread, as I give any one who is hungry.”

“All right; only, what did he tell you?”

She hesitated. Nettleton gave the rope a twitch, and looked up at the
limb. The hint was enough.

“The man said he was up from below on a scout. He was anxious to know
what I knew about the voice of a woman which he said had been heard all
along the river. He heard it distinctly as he passed the road along the
river by the Ghost Swamp; others had heard it, and he believed that I
could tell him as to its meaning. I told him it was a sign that he was
singled out for death—that every person who heard it was called, and he
might, therefore, make up his mind that his time was come. With that he
left. I did not inform him of who was in my cabin, nor any thing about
what had happened here. So I hope you will let me go, and frighten me no
more.”

Nettleton slowly lifted the noose from her neck, and, without another
word, walked back to the cabin. He called out Lieutenant Wells, who was
then watching at the captain’s bedside, and the two friends held a long
consultation together, which ended by an order for a guard of twenty to
be ready for a night expedition.

By ten o’clock all were in readiness and on their way, taking the river
path down stream. Wells was in command. Nettleton acted as scout and
guide. All night long they pressed on, and daylight found them on the
hills opposite the spot indicated by Madge as the locality of the cave
in the bank. Asking Wells for his field-glass, Nettleton carefully
scrutinized the river’s bank opposite. After a short survey he suddenly
exclaimed:

“_The Ingen_, as sure as Sacramento!”

“What do you say?” inquired Wells.

“Fall-leaf—see him—there he lays, and there is the cave. I’m blest if I
know what to make of it. I supposed, _of course_, that that red-skin was
roasted alive in the mill; but there he is, and here I goes.”

So saying, down he dashed into the river, and forded its waters rapidly.
Once on the opposite side, he hurried up the bank, and soon reached the
ledge across which the Indian was lying. The poor fellow was but half
conscious from over-fatigue and hunger, yet his eyes were fixed with
cat-like vigilance upon the aperture of the cave, while his hand still
firmly clasped the knife upon which he relied to do his deadly work.

Nettleton approached him silently, and touched his feet. At once the
Indian looked behind him.

“Give Fall-leaf drink—quick!” was his hurried whisper, while the finger
on his lip indicated silence.

Nettleton comprehended all at a glance. Passing his canteen and knapsack
to Fall-leaf, he beheld the Indian drink and eat with satisfaction. Not
a word passed between them.

“Good! Fall-leaf _much_ weak; now strong again,” he whispered.

“Where’s Miss Mamie?”

The Indian pointed to the cavern.

“Walker, too?”

Fall-leaf nodded, and scowled so fiercely that Nettleton perceived the
savage wanted no interference in his case.

“Shan’t I do the job for ye?”

“No—Fall-leaf _mad_. Me kill ’em—you go way.”

“That’s the talk, Ingen. You shall have your man; but, Jerusalem, don’t
I ache to git my paws on him!”

A noise was now heard in the cave; it was Walker’s voice. “I’ll not
permit you to sing, I again tell you. If those men crossing the river
are Union soldiers, you shall not betray our whereabouts, and if
Fall-leaf moves I’ll shoot him!”

“Bah, you ornery cuss; _I’m_ on your track now!” shouted Nettleton.

“William—dear William!” cried the captive woman, recognizing his voice.

“_Here!_” he responded, “and so chock full of the devil that if I don’t
get rid of it soon it will spile me. Walker, you dirty beast, dare you
fight me?” he yelled.

“I dare fight any decent antagonist, but don’t care to dirty my hands
with you,” was the reply.

“Oh, you nasty, miserable, thievin’ woman-stealer, man-assassinator.
I’ll cook your breakfast for you, but Fall-leaf shall eat it; _he’ll_
dirty his hands with _you_!”

“I defy you and all your crew,” growled the rebel. “If one of you dares
to show your head, you are a dead man!”

“Blast yer picter, here’s a head—shoot it!” cried Nettleton, sticking
his head out in a manner to dare Walker’s fire.

The scoundrel was prepared, and discharged his gun in an instant. Its
report had not ceased its echo ere Fall-leaf, with a bound like a
panther, dropped before the entrance of the hole. Walker stood there
with knife in hand, to foil any such attempt to storm his castle. A
quick blow with his foot sent the Indian headlong over the ledge.

“Try that on me,” roared Nettleton, who, uninjured by the ball from
Walker’s musket, was at the Indian’s heels.

No sooner said than done, and Nettleton received an unexpected blow in
the bowels from the rebel’s heavy boot which sent him almost instantly
over the ledge after Fall-leaf.

That was the propitious moment for escape. Without a word to his
captive, he passed out upon the ledge, and had nearly reached its
terminus when Lieutenant Wells, followed by his men, confronted the
desperate man. Drawing his revolver, Wells cried:

“Surrender or you are a dead man!”

“I never will surrender to you,” was the fierce reply, as the now
cornered desperado began slowly to retire, backward, to regain his
stronghold.

He had retreated fully half-way to the entrance, when his heel caught in
the rough floor of the ledge, and his balance was lost. For a moment he
sought to regain his foothold, but, finding it gone, he gave a shout and
leaped over the precipice.

The soldiers looked over the ledge and saw his form disappear in the
trees beneath. Wells did not wait, but rushed to the cavern mouth.

“Miss Mamie.”

A form darkened the passage, and within stood Miss Hayward, smiling and
blushing as if just caught at her toilet.

With a cry of joy Wells entered and clasped her to his bosom.

“Safe and uninjured! Thank God—thank God!” answered the maiden.

“Safe and restored; and, thank God, your brother, too, is recovered, and
is now in our hands, doing well!”

“Then I am happy, indeed!” she could only reply, while tears of joy
checked further utterance.

Wells had entirely forgotten Walker, in his moment of sweet communion
with his restored friend. But, a shout which came up from the depths
below recalled him to duty. It was a wild Indian war-whoop; then a
succession of ejaculations which the men could plainly distinguish.

“Go in, Ingen!” “Walk along, Walker, you darn skunk you!” “There, that’s
a good un, Ingen!” “Now another in the corn-crib!” “There he goes!”
“Hooray for the Ingen!”

All well knew the meaning of this, and a number of the men hastened to
the base of the cliff, by a long, roundabout path, which came up from
the river at the ford below. They arrived to find Walker slain, and
Fall-leaf badly cut in the face, arms and shoulders, but no serious
wounds on the body. Nettleton stood over his friend, bathing his wounds
in the clear waters of the river.

“Ingen’s done for the cut-throat, sure. It was mean to shut me out; but
it was his game, ’cause he treed it. I’d give all I’ll ever be worth—”

“Would you give Sally?” put in one of the men.

“Dang Sally—no, dang my skin—that is, dang me if I wouldn’t give my
commission, boys, that’s it! give my commission to have had the
satisfaction of doin’ Fall-leaf’s work.” Nettleton looked savagely at
the body of the dead man, seeming to feel that he had made a personal
sacrifice in permitting the Indian to kill his enemy.

It would appear that both Fall-leaf and Nettleton, when kicked off the
ledge, fell at its foot without injury, as the base was banked up to a
considerable distance with the decayed and water-soaked _débris_ of the
bank, down which they rolled into the water. They had recovered, and
stepped out into the stream to look up to the ledge, when they beheld
Wells and Walker confronted. In a moment the rebel staggered, and went
bounding off the ledge, and, like his two antagonists, came tumbling and
sliding down the declivity, landing at the water’s brink upon his feet.
There he was received by the Indian, with the wild whoop which startled
those above. Nettleton, in honor bound not to interfere, stood by while
the two fierce foes closed in deadly conflict. Walker, though a resolute
and strong man, was not equal in a knife fight to the supple savage.
After a few passes, Fall-leaf buried his knife in the rebel’s bosom.
Thus closed the career of a bad man—bad by nature, but rendered doubly
bad by the cause which he espoused. To serve that cause he had to betray
his country, desert his friends, stifle the voice of conscience, perjure
his honor, become a hypocrite and a deceiver: after that, all other
degrees of crime were easy.

Wells followed the men at length, and appeared on the spot. He was
shocked at the sight before him, but conceded its justice. His own wish
was to have secured Walker for trial and punishment according to
military law; yet, it must be acknowledged that, many times, he felt
like wreaking condign personal vengeance on the head of the man who had
wrought so successfully in crime. He ordered the body to be buried in
the _débris_ at the foot of the cliff; and there it reposes to-day, with
no monument save the cave above, which will long remain as a witness to
the traitor’s crime and traitor’s doom.




                              CHAPTER XIV.

                 _The Body-Guard’s Sickness and Cure._


SLOWLY the party wended its way back to the mill. Just at nightfall it
came in sight of the lowly hut which covered the treasure so dear to the
heart of the rescued maiden. How her eager arms longed to clasp her
brother’s form to her bosom—how her ears longed for the sound of his
voice! The wings of the swallow would have been slow for her pining
soul; but the moment of reunion came at last—the dead was made alive,
the lost restored. Miss Hayward, gallanted by Wells, pressed on ahead of
the troop, and their panting steeds at length stood riderless before the
cabin-door, for the riders had disappeared within.

The meeting of brother and sister was one of mingled pleasure and pain.
Both had suffered so much that to think of it was pain. Captain Hayward
was greatly emaciated. Loss of blood, fever, hunger and exposure would
have ended a life less tenacious than his; but, despite his suffering,
the presence of friends, the rescue of his sister, the anticipated
happiness of her union with the man who had proven himself so well
worthy of her—all conspired to give an elasticity to his spirits more
potent than the infusions of herbs prepared by the not unskilled hands
of old Madge, who, from an enemy, had, “by the force of couldn’t help
herself,” as Nettleton declared, become a useful instrument at a
critical moment.

And what about Nettleton? All day long after the morning’s experience at
the cave, he had plodded on soberly, somewhat absorbed in his own
reflections. Behind him sat Fall-leaf, who, from his weak state, was
well content to ride. The Indian, though perfectly silent and apparently
indifferent to all things, now that his work was done, still was
inwardly pleased at the rescue and the thought of the pleasure in store
for the captain, of whose safety he had been informed by Nettleton; and
he was quite willing to go into camp for a few days before putting out
again on his endless scouts.

“Nettle be sick?” he at length asked of his companion.

“Not by a darn sight, Ingen?”

“Nettle _be_ sick—Fall-leaf knows it!”

“You be danged to darnation, you red onion-head of a Delaware!” was the
somewhat excited answer, as he turned in the saddle and stared the
Indian in the face.

Fall-leaf smiled. “Nettle want physic—Miss Long give Nettle physic,” he
obstinately persisted.

“Now look here, Mr. Ingen, ef you wants to fight, jest you say so, and
I’ll be catawampussed ef I don’t lick you wuss’n a nigger what’s got a
mad woman arter him!”

“Fall-leaf no want to fight Nettle. Maybe whip Nettle—den what Miss Long
say?”

“Yoh—yoh! you mean, sneakin’ son of a brick-kiln! Ef you don’t stop that
clapper in your head, I’ll be switched ef I don’t put a peg through it!”
And he set his face firmly to the front, roweled the horse severely with
his spurs, and dashed ahead at a speed quite uncomfortable to the
provoking Delaware.

When the cavalcade reached the cabin, Nettleton did not obtrude himself
upon the party within. For an hour or more they were alone. At length
Hayward asked: “Where is my brave preserver? Why is he not here to enjoy
our happiness? And Fall-leaf, too; I would thank him as he deserves, the
noble and devoted savage.”

Search was made. Fall-leaf was found out by the camp-fire, undergoing
the process of the lotion-cure for his wounds, at the hands of Madge,
who was carefully washing the bruised and cut flesh of the red-man. All
inquiries for Nettleton were fruitless; he was not to be found. It was
ascertained, at length, that his horse also was gone. Many were the
surmises as to the cause of his absence, and fears were expressed for
his safety.

Morning came, and the party, now rejoined by the entire battalion,
prepared to move, by easy stages, from the valley toward the line of
march pursued by the retreating army. Captain Hayward was made quite
comfortable in a camp-wagon, with his sister for companion and nurse.
Fall-leaf pushed out far ahead to scout and secure the command from
surprise. Adjutant Hinton and Wells were tireless in their devotion to
the comfort and safety of their charge. It was a pleasant journey—that
week of slow progress toward Tipton. At length, however, the village
hove in sight. The white tents dotting the hills and valleys proved that
the division was there. While yet a long way off, a party of horsemen,
accompanied by ladies, was seen dashing off at full speed toward the
spot where the battalion had halted for its noon bivouac. Wells caught
sight of the party, and with his glass made out the gaunt form of
Nettleton far in advance. Behind him on the same horse rode a female,
whose identity the officer could not fix. Nearer and nearer the horsemen
came, until, after an exciting race, they dashed into the camp—Nettleton
and Sally Long! They were received with a wild huzza from the entire
troop, and none shouted louder than Nettleton himself.

“Hooray! hooray! By the eternal jingo!” he cried, leaping from the
horse, and leaving Miss Sally sitting there alone, before the eyes of
the joyous and excited troops. Making his way to the captain’s
“marquee”—as the men had named the wagon—he was welcomed by Hayward in a
manner which quickly turned his servant’s joy to mourning, for the
embrace of real affection bestowed quite upset Nettleton’s confidence.

“I’m nothin’ but a great darn skunk, any how!” he exclaimed, as,
breaking away from the captain’s embrace, he started for his horse and
the neglected Sally.

“Nettle be sick!”

He turned to behold Fall-leaf gazing upon him in mock compassion.

“Not by a danged sight, you infernal lump of glory!” he now shouted, as,
clasping the Indian in his arms, he gave the red-man a hug which brought
forth a grunt.

“Ugh! Nettle make Fall-leaf sick! Guess Nettle got full of Miss Sally
now!”

“Yes, sar; and thar she is, in all her glory!” was the rejoinder, as the
“body-guard” pointed, in evident pride, to the smiling woman.

“Gentlemen of the jury! let me present to you my wife—the dangdest sk—
no, the most blissful woman you ever saw.”

“Your _wife_!” exclaimed a dozen voices at once.

“Yes, my wife! Hitched to me tighter’n a handle to the jug, by Chaplain
Disbrow, two days ago, by the eternal jingo!”

This was enough for the men. All order gave way before the hilarious
uproar which followed. They pressed around Sally to offer their
congratulations, which the delighted wife received with great
good-nature and dignity, still sitting where she had been left—behind
the saddle, on the horse.

At this moment the party first descried rode up. It was composed of Mrs.
Hinton, Miss Morton and a number of friends eager to welcome the captain
and his sister, of whose fortunes Nettleton had most unexpectedly, three
days before, brought the news to camp. That it was a joyous meeting may
well be assumed.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Does not our story here end? To say that Miss Mamie Hayward soon became
Mrs. Wells, in the presence of the whole division—that a grand gala-day
followed—is but half the truth, however; for, at the same time, another
bridegroom was there in the form of the pale but happy Captain Henry
Hayward, who took to be his comforter and his much-needed nurse, the
woman who loved him most truly—Miss Nettie Morton. It was, indeed, a
most happy consummation of a drama which promised, at one time, to end
only in sorrow and broken hearts.

Not the least happy of all that throng, nor the least noted, was

                  NETTLETON, THE CAPTAIN’S BODY-GUARD.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




Transcriber's note:

Punctuation and hyphenation have been made consistent.

The spelling has been retained with the exception of the following:

           hight -> height
           iutruder -> intruder
           turkle-dove -> turtle-dove
           disppointment -> disappointment
           _he’ll_ dirty has hands -> _he’ll_ dirty his hands



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRISONER OF THE MILL***


******* This file should be named 51318-0.txt or 51318-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/1/3/1/51318


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

